
PHILOLOGY Column Image.	COMMENTARY Column Image.	TOYNBEE Column Image.	DARTMOUTH DANTE PROJECT Column Image.	AUDIO Column Image.	IMAGES Column Image.
Move to the Princeton Dante Project home.	Move to the start of Canto 22
Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.
Move to the following Location: Inf, Canto 21, Lines 1:200	Move to the Summary Page.	Move to the table of contents.	Move to the Search Page.	Move to the following Location: Inf, Canto 23, Lines 1:200

    Io vidi già cavalier muover campo,	1	I have seen the cavalry break camp,

e cominciare stormo e far lor mostra,	2	prepare for an attack, make their muster

e talvolta partir per loro scampo;	3	and at times fall back to save themselves.

    corridor vidi per la terra vostra,	4	I have seen outriders in your land,

o Aretini, e vidi gir gualdane,	5	O Aretines. I have seen raiding-parties,

fedir torneamenti e correr giostra;	6	tournaments of teams, hand-to-hand jousts

    quando con trombe, e quando con campane,	7	begun with bells, trumpets, or drums,

con tamburi e con cenni di castella,	8	with signals from the castle,

e con cose nostrali e con istrane;	9	with summons of our own and those from foreign lands,

    né già con sì diversa cennamella	10	but never to such outlandish fanfare

cavalier vidi muover né pedoni,	11	have I seen horsemen move, or infantry,

né nave a segno di terra o di stella.	12	or ship set sail at sign from land or star.

    Noi andavam con li diece demoni.	13	On we went, escorted by ten demons.

Ahi fiera compagnia! ma ne la chiesa	14	What savage company! But, as they say,

coi santi, e in taverna coi ghiottoni.	15	'in church with saints, with guzzlers in the tavern.'

    Pur a la pegola era la mia 'ntesa,	16	My attention was fixed upon the pitch

per veder de la bolgia ogne contegno	17	to note each detail of this gulch

e de la gente ch'entro v'era incesa.	18	and of the people poaching in it.

    Come i dalfini, quando fanno segno	19	Like dolphins, when they arch their backs

a' marinar con l'arco de la schiena	20	above the water, giving sailors warning

che s'argomentin di campar lor legno,	21	to prepare to save their ship,

    talor così, ad alleggiar la pena,	22	so from time to time, to ease his pain,

mostrav' alcun de' peccatori 'l dosso	23	one of the sinners would show his back

e nascondea in men che non balena.	24	and, quick as lightning, hide it once again.

    E come a l'orlo de l'acqua d'un fosso	25	And just as in a ditch at water's edge

stanno i ranocchi pur col muso fuori,	26	frogs squat with but their snouts in sight,

sì che celano i piedi e l'altro grosso,	27	their bodies and their legs all hidden,

    sì stavan d'ogne parte i peccatori;	28	so were the sinners scattered everywhere.

ma come s'appressava Barbariccia,	29	But they, at the approach of Barbariccia,

così si ritraén sotto i bollori.	30	withdrew back down beneath the boiling.

    I' vidi, e anco il cor me n'accapriccia,	31	There I saw -- and my heart still shudders at it --

uno aspettar così, com' elli 'ncontra	32	one who lingered, as it can happen

ch'una rana rimane e l'altra spiccia;	33	that one frog stays while yet another plunges,

    e Graffiacan, che li era più di contra,	34	and Graffiacane, who was nearest him,

li arruncigliò le 'mpegolate chiome	35	caught a billhook in his pitchy locks

e trassel sù, che mi parve una lontra.	36	and hauled him out, looking like an otter.

    I' sapea già di tutti quanti 'l nome,	37	By now I knew their names,

sì li notai quando fuorono eletti,	38	since I had noted these when they were chosen

e poi ch'e' si chiamaro, attesi come.	39	and when they called to one another.

    "O Rubicante, fa che tu li metti	40	'Set your claws to work, Rubicante,

li unghioni a dosso, sì che tu lo scuoi!"	41	see you rip his skin off,'

gridavan tutti insieme i maladetti.	42	shouted all the accursèd crew together.

    E io: "Maestro mio, fa, se tu puoi,	43	And I: 'Master, if you can do it,

che tu sappi chi è lo sciagurato	44	find out the name of this poor wretch

venuto a man de li avversari suoi."	45	caught in the clutches of his enemies.'

    Lo duca mio li s'accostò allato;	46	My leader got up close beside him

domandollo ond' ei fosse, e quei rispuose:	47	and asked him where he came from. He replied:

"I' fui del regno di Navarra nato.	48	'I was born in the kingdom of Navarre.

    Mia madre a servo d'un segnor mi puose,	49	'My mother, who had conceived me by a wastrel --

che m'avea generato d'un ribaldo,	50	destroyer of himself and all his goods --

distruggitor di sé e di sue cose.	51	put me in service with a man of rank.

    Poi fui famiglia del buon re Tebaldo;	52	'Then I joined the retinue of worthy Thibaut:

quivi mi misi a far baratteria,	53	there first I set myself to taking bribes,

di ch'io rendo ragione in questo caldo."	54	for which I pay the reckoning in this heat.'

    E Cirïatto, a cui di bocca uscia	55	And Ciriatto, from whose jaw curved up

d'ogne parte una sanna come a porco,	56	on either side a tusk, like the wild boar's,

li fé sentir come l'una sdruscia.	57	made him feel how one of these could rip.

    Tra male gatte era venuto 'l sorco;	58	The mouse had fallen in with wicked cats.

ma Barbariccia il chiuse con le braccia	59	But Barbariccia blocked them with his arms

e disse: "State in là, mentr' io lo 'nforco."	60	and said: 'Stand back and let me jab him,'

    E al maestro mio volse la faccia;	61	then turned to face my master:

"Domanda," disse, "ancor, se più disii	62	'Speak up, if you are eager to learn more,

saper da lui, prima ch'altri 'l disfaccia."	63	before I let him have a mangling.'

    Lo duca dunque: "Or dì: de li altri rii	64	And my leader: 'Of the other sinners in the pitch,

conosci tu alcun che sia latino	65	tell me, is anyone Italian?'

sotto la pece?" E quelli: "I' mi partii,	66	And he: 'I just now came from one

    poco è, da un che fu di là vicino.	67	'who hailed from near those parts. I wish

Così foss' io ancor con lui coperto,	68	I still were with him in the pitch --

ch'i' non temerei unghia né uncino!"	69	then I'd have no fear of hook or claw!'

    E Libicocco "Troppo avem sofferto,"	70	Then Libicocco said: 'This is just too much,'

disse; e preseli 'l braccio col runciglio,	71	caught him with his grapple by the arm

sì che, stracciando, ne portò un lacerto.	72	and, ripping, gouged out a hunk of flesh.

    Draghignazzo anco i volle dar di piglio	73	Draghignazzo, too, wanted to catch him up,

giuso a le gambe; onde 'l decurio loro	74	by the legs, at which their captain

si volse intorno intorno con mal piglio.	75	wheeled round on them with an ugly look.

    Quand' elli un poco rappaciati fuoro,	76	After their fury had subsided,

a lui, ch'ancor mirava sua ferita,	77	my leader seized this chance to ask

domandò 'l duca mio sanza dimoro:	78	the one still staring at his wound:

    "Chi fu colui da cui mala partita	79	'Who is the one you mentioned, from whom

di' che facesti per venire a proda?"	80	you parted so unwisely when you came ashore?'

Ed ei rispuose: "Fu frate Gomita,	81	And he replied: 'It was Fra Gomìta

    quel di Gallura, vasel d'ogne froda,	82	'of Gallura, a vessel full of fraud,

ch'ebbe i nemici di suo donno in mano,	83	who had his master's enemies in hand

e fé sì lor, che ciascun se ne loda.	84	but dealt with them so each one sings his praises.

    Danar si tolse e lasciolli di piano,	85	'He took their money and discreetly let them off,

sì com' e' dice; e ne li altri offici anche	86	as he himself admits. And in his other actions

barattier fu non picciol, ma sovrano.	87	he was no small-time swindler but a king.

    Usa con esso donno Michel Zanche	88	'Don Michel Zanche of Logudoro

di Logodoro; e a dir di Sardigna	89	keeps company with him and, when speaking

le lingue lor non si sentono stanche.	90	of Sardegna, their tongues are never weary.

    Omè, vedete l'altro che digrigna;	91	'Oh, look at that one there, gnashing his teeth! --

i' direi anche, ma i' temo ch'ello	92	I would say more, but I'm afraid that demon's

non s'apparecchi a grattarmi la tigna."	93	getting set to give my mange a scratching.'

    E 'l gran proposto, vòlto a Farfarello	94	And the great marshal, turning to Farfarello,

che stralunava li occhi per fedire,	95	who was rolling his eyes, ready to strike,

disse: "Fatti 'n costà, malvagio uccello!"	96	said: 'Back off, you filthy bird!'

    "Se voi volete vedere o udire,"	97	'If you would care to see or hear,'

ricominciò lo spaürato appresso,	98	the emboldened spirit then began again,

"Toschi o Lombardi, io ne farò venire;	99	'Tuscans or Lombards, I can make some come.

    ma stieno i Malebranche un poco in cesso,	100	'But let the Malebranche stand away

sì ch'ei non teman de le lor vendette;	101	so that the sinners have no fear of vengeance,

e io, seggendo in questo loco stesso,	102	and, keeping to my place right here,

    per un ch'io son, ne farò venir sette	103	'for one of me, I will make seven come

quand' io suffolerò, com' è nostro uso	104	if I whistle, as is our custom

di fare allor che fori alcun si mette."	105	when one of us pulls free out of the pitch.'

    Cagnazzo a cotal motto levò 'l muso,	106	At this Cagnazzo lifted up his snout and said,

crollando 'l capo, e disse: "Odi malizia	107	shaking his head: 'Hear the cunning stunt

ch'elli ha pensata per gittarsi giuso!"	108	he has contrived to throw himself back in!'

    Ond' ei, ch'avea lacciuoli a gran divizia,	109	And he, with artifice in store, replied:

rispuose: "Malizioso son io troppo,	110	'I must indeed be cunning if I procure

quand' io procuro a' mia maggior trestizia."	111	still greater anguish for my friends.'

    Alichin non si tenne e, di rintoppo	112	Alichino couldn't stand this any more and said,

a li altri, disse a lui: "Se tu ti cali,	113	in opposition to the others: 'If you dive

io non ti verrò dietro di gualoppo,	114	back in I won't pursue you on the run --

    ma batterò sovra la pece l'ali.	115	'oh no! I'll beat my wings above the pitch.

Lascisi 'l collo, e sia la ripa scudo,	116	Let's leave the ridge and hide behind the bank.

a veder se tu sol più di noi vali."	117	We'll see if you alone can take us on.'

    O tu che leggi, udirai nuovo ludo:	118	Now, reader, you shall hear strange sport.

ciascun da l'altra costa li occhi volse,	119	All turned their backs to where the sinner stood,

quel prima, ch'a ciò fare era più crudo.	120	he first who'd most opposed the plan.

    Lo Navarrese ben suo tempo colse;	121	The Navarrese chose his moment well,

fermò le piante a terra, e in un punto	122	planted his feet and in a second

saltò e dal proposto lor si sciolse.	123	leaped and escaped from their designs.

    Di che ciascun di colpa fu compunto,	124	At this they all were angry at their blunder,

ma quei più che cagion fu del difetto;	125	but most of all the one whose fault it was,

però si mosse e gridò: "Tu se' giunto!"	126	so that he darted up and cried: 'Now you are caught!'

    Ma poco i valse: ché l'ali al sospetto	127	It did him little good, for even wings

non potero avanzar; quelli andò sotto,	128	could not catch up with terror: the sinner dove

e quei drizzò volando suso il petto:	129	and the devil turned up his breast in flight,

    non altrimenti l'anitra di botto,	130	just as the wild duck, when the falcon nears,

quando 'l falcon s'appressa, giù s'attuffa,	131	dives for the bottom, and the bird of prey

ed ei ritorna sù crucciato e rotto.	132	must fly back up, angry and outsmarted.

    Irato Calcabrina de la buffa,	133	Calcabrina, furious at this trick,

volando dietro li tenne, invaghito	134	was winging close behind him, eager for the sinner

che quei campasse per aver la zuffa;	135	to break away as an excuse to scuffle,

    e come 'l barattier fu disparito,	136	and, since the barrator had vanished,

così volse li artigli al suo compagno,	137	he turned his claws against his fellow

e fu con lui sopra 'l fosso ghermito.	138	and came to grips with him above the ditch.

    Ma l'altro fu bene sparvier grifagno	139	But the other was indeed a full-fledged hawk,

ad artigliar ben lui, e amendue	140	fierce with his talons, and the pair of them

cadder nel mezzo del bogliente stagno.	141	went tumbling down into the scalding pond.

    Lo caldo sghermitor sùbito fue;	142	The heat unclutched them in a moment,

ma però di levarsi era neente,	143	but they had so beglued their wings

sì avieno inviscate l'ali sue.	144	there was no way to rise above the pitch.

    Barbariccia, con li altri suoi dolente,	145	Barbariccia, lamenting with the rest,

quattro ne fé volar da l'altra costa	146	had four of them fly to the other bank,

con tutt' i raffi, e assai prestamente	147	each with his hook in hand, and in no time

    di qua, di là discesero a la posta;	148	on this side and on that they clambered down

porser li uncini verso li 'mpaniati,	149	to their posts, reaching out their grapples

ch'eran già cotti dentro da la crosta.	150	to the pitch-trapped pair, already cooked to a crust.

E noi lasciammo lor così 'mpacciati.	151	And that is how we left them in that broil.

Copyright © 1997-1998 The Trustees of Princeton University and Prof. Robert Hollander.
All Rights Reserved. Use of this site is governed by Terms and Conditions of Use/Legal Notices in connection with the use of this web site.
Thank you for visiting. And for reading the fine print. Bugs? Comments?




































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































commedia	minor works	multimedia	lectures	site info	help	search
