
PHILOLOGY Column Image.	COMMENTARY Column Image.	TOYNBEE Column Image.	DARTMOUTH DANTE PROJECT Column Image.	AUDIO Column Image.	IMAGES Column Image.
Move to the Princeton Dante Project home.	Move to the start of Canto 25
Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.
Move to the following Location: Inf, Canto 24, Lines 1:200	Move to the Summary Page.	Move to the table of contents.	Move to the Search Page.	Move to the following Location: Inf, Canto 26, Lines 1:200

    Al fine de le sue parole il ladro	1	Then, making the figs with both his thumbs,

le mani alzò con amendue le fiche,	2	the thief raised up his fists and cried:

gridando: "Togli, Dio, ch'a te le squadro!"	3	'Take that, God! It's aimed at you!'

    Da indi in qua mi fuor le serpi amiche,	4	From that time on the serpents were my friends,

perch' una li s'avvolse allora al collo,	5	for one of them coiled itself around his neck

come dicesse "Non vo' che più diche";	6	as if to say, 'Now you shall speak no more,'

    e un'altra a le braccia, e rilegollo,	7	while another enmeshed his arms and held him fast,

ribadendo sé stessa sì dinanzi,	8	knotting itself so tight around his front

che non potea con esse dare un crollo.	9	he could not even twitch his arms.

    Ahi Pistoia, Pistoia, ché non stanzi	10	Ah, Pistoia, Pistoia, why won't you resolve

d'incenerarti sì che più non duri,	11	to burn yourself to ashes, cease to be,

poi che 'n mal fare il seme tuo avanzi?	12	since you exceed your ancestors in evil?

    Per tutt' i cerchi de lo 'nferno scuri	13	Through all the gloomy rounds of Hell

non vidi spirto in Dio tanto superbo,	14	I saw no soul so prideful against God,

non quel che cadde a Tebe giù da' muri.	15	not even him who toppled from the walls at Thebes.

    El si fuggì che non parlò più verbo;	16	He ran away without another word.

e io vidi un centauro pien di rabbia	17	And then I saw a centaur full of rage

venir chiamando: "Ov' è, ov' è l'acerbo?"	18	come shouting: 'Where, where is that unripe soul?'

    Maremma non cred' io che tante n'abbia,	19	Maremma does not have as many snakes,

quante bisce elli avea su per la groppa	20	I think, as he had on his back,

infin ove comincia nostra labbia.	21	from where the human part begins down to the rump.

    Sovra le spalle, dietro da la coppa,	22	On his shoulders, at the nape of his neck,

con l'ali aperte li giacea un draco;	23	crouched a dragon with its wings spread wide

e quello affuoca qualunque s'intoppa.	24	that sets on fire whatever it encounters.

    Lo mio maestro disse: "Questi è Caco,	25	My master said: 'That is Cacus,

che, sotto 'l sasso di monte Aventino,	26	who in the cave beneath the Aventine

di sangue fece spesse volte laco.	27	many times over has made a lake of blood.

    Non va co' suoi fratei per un cammino,	28	'His road is different from his brothers'

per lo furto che frodolente fece	29	because he stole, with wicked cunning,

del grande armento ch'elli ebbe a vicino;	30	the herd of cattle he found near at hand.

    onde cessar le sue opere biece	31	'For that his wily ways were ended

sotto la mazza d'Ercule, che forse	32	beneath the club of Hercules, who struck perhaps

gliene diè cento, e non sentì le diece."	33	a hundred blows, though he felt not the tenth.'

    Mentre che sì parlava, ed el trascorse,	34	While my master spoke the centaur had run past.

e tre spiriti venner sotto noi,	35	Below where we were standing, three new souls

de' quai né io né 'l duca mio s'accorse,	36	had neared, although we did not see them

    se non quando gridar: "Chi siete voi?"	37	until we heard their shouts: 'You,

per che nostra novella si ristette,	38	who are you?' At that he stopped his tale

e intendemmo pur ad essi poi.	39	and we gave heed to them alone.

    Io non li conoscea; ma ei seguette,	40	I knew none of them, and yet it happened --

come suol seguitar per alcun caso,	41	as often happens by some chance --

che l'un nomar un altro convenette,	42	that one had cause to speak another's name,

    dicendo: "Cianfa dove fia rimaso?"	43	asking: 'What's become of Cianfa?'

per ch'io, acciò che 'l duca stesse attento,	44	And then, to catch my guide's attention,

mi puosi 'l dito su dal mento al naso.	45	I held my finger up from chin to nose.

    Se tu se' or, lettore, a creder lento	46	If, reader, you are slow to credit

ciò ch'io dirò, non sarà maraviglia	47	what I'm about to tell you, it's no wonder:

ché io che 'l vidi, a pena il mi consento.	48	I saw it, and I myself can scarce believe it.

    Com' io tenea levate in lor le ciglia,	49	While I stood staring, with eyebrows raised,

e un serpente con sei piè si lancia	50	a reptile with six legs propelled itself

dinanzi a l'uno, e tutto a lui s'appiglia.	51	at one of them, and fastened itself to him.

    Co' piè di mezzo li avvinse la pancia	52	It grabbed his belly with its middle claws,

e con li anterïor le braccia prese;	53	then with its forepaws held his arms

poi li addentò e l'una e l'altra guancia;	54	and bit through both his cheeks.

    li diretani a le cosce distese,	55	It stretched its hind feet down the other's thighs,

e miseli la coda tra 'mbedue	56	thrusting its tail between them

e dietro per le ren sù la ritese.	57	and curled it up behind, above the buttocks.

    Ellera abbarbicata mai non fue	58	Never did clinging ivy fix itself

ad alber sì, come l'orribil fiera	59	so tight upon a tree as did that fearsome beast

per l'altrui membra avviticchiò le sue.	60	entwine itself around the other's limbs.

    Poi s'appiccar, come di calda cera	61	Then they fused together, as if made

fossero stati, e mischiar lor colore,	62	of molten wax, mixing their colors

né l'un né l'altro già parea quel ch'era:	63	so that neither seemed what it had been before,

    come procede innanzi da l'ardore,	64	as over the surface of a scrap of parchment,

per lo papiro suso, un color bruno	65	before the advancing flame, a brownish color comes

che non è nero ancora e 'l bianco more.	66	that is not black, yet makes the white die out.

    Li altri due 'l riguardavano, e ciascuno	67	The other two were looking on and each

gridava: "Omè, Agnel, come ti muti!	68	was shouting: 'Oh my, Agnello, how you change!

Vedi che già non se' né due né uno."	69	Look, now you are neither two nor one!'

    Già eran li due capi un divenuti,	70	The two heads had already been united,

quando n'apparver due figure miste	71	two sets of features blending,

in una faccia, ov' eran due perduti.	72	both lost in a single face.

    Fersi le braccia due di quattro liste;	73	Four separate limbs combined to form two arms.

le cosce con le gambe e 'l ventre e 'l casso	74	The thighs and calves, the stomach and the chest

divenner membra che non fuor mai viste.	75	turned into members never seen before.

    Ogne primaio aspetto ivi era casso:	76	All trace of their first aspect was erased

due e nessun l'imagine perversa	77	and the unnatural figure seemed both two

parea; e tal sen gio con lento passo.	78	and none and lumbered off at its slow pace.

    Come 'l ramarro sotto la gran fersa	79	As the green lizard beneath the scorching lash

dei dì canicular, cangiando sepe,	80	of dog-day heat, between one hedge and the next,

folgore par se la via attraversa,	81	seems lightning as it streaks across the road,

    sì pareva, venendo verso l'epe	82	just so appeared -- darting toward the bellies

de li altri due, un serpentello acceso,	83	of the other two -- a little fiery reptile,

livido e nero come gran di pepe;	84	black and livid as a peppercorn.

    e quella parte onde prima è preso	85	That part where first we are nourished

nostro alimento, a l'un di lor trafisse;	86	it transfixed in one of them

poi cadde giuso innanzi lui disteso.	87	and then fell prone before him.

    Lo trafitto 'l mirò, ma nulla disse;	88	The one transfixed just stared, said nothing.

anzi, co' piè fermati, sbadigliava	89	Indeed, with his feet stock-still, he yawned,

pur come sonno o febbre l'assalisse.	90	as if deep sleep or fever had assailed him.

    Elli 'l serpente e quei lui riguardava;	91	He and the reptile stared at one another.

l'un per la piaga e l'altro per la bocca	92	Both gave out dense smoke, one from its wound,

fummavan forte, e 'l fummo si scontrava.	93	the other from its mouth. Then their smoke merged.

    Taccia Lucano omai là dov' e' tocca	94	Let Lucan now fall silent where he tells

del misero Sabello e di Nasidio,	95	of poor Sabellus and Nasidius,

e attenda a udir quel ch'or si scocca.	96	and let him wait to hear what comes forth now!

    Taccia di Cadmo e d'Aretusa Ovidio,	97	Let Ovid not speak of Cadmus or Arethusa,

ché se quello in serpente e quella in fonte	98	for if his poem turns him into a serpent

converte poetando, io non lo 'nvidio;	99	and her into a fountain, I grudge it not,

    ché due nature mai a fronte a fronte	100	for never did he change two natures, face to face,

non trasmutò sì ch'amendue le forme	101	in such a way that both their forms

a cambiar lor matera fosser pronte.	102	were quite so quick exchanging substance.

    Insieme si rispuosero a tai norme,	103	Their corresponding changes went like this:

che 'l serpente la coda in forca fesse,	104	the reptile split its tail into a fork

e 'l feruto ristrinse insieme l'orme.	105	and he that was wounded drew his feet together.

    Le gambe con le cosce seco stesse	106	First his calves and then his thighs began

s'appiccar sì, che 'n poco la giuntura	107	to knit so that in but a moment

non facea segno alcun che si paresse.	108	no sign of a division could be seen.

    Togliea la coda fessa la figura	109	The cloven tail assumed the shapes

che si perdeva là, e la sua pelle	110	the other one was losing, and his skin

si facea molle, e quella di là dura.	111	was turning soft while the other's hardened.

    Io vidi intrar le braccia per l'ascelle,	112	I saw the man's arms shrinking toward the armpits

e i due piè de la fiera, ch'eran corti,	113	and the brute's forepaws, which had been short,

tanto allungar quanto accorciavan quelle.	114	lengthen, precisely as the other's dwindled.

    Poscia li piè di rietro, insieme attorti,	115	Then the hind-paws, twisting together,

diventaron lo membro che l'uom cela,	116	became the member that a man conceals,

e 'l misero del suo n'avea due porti.	117	and from his own the wretch had grown two paws.

    Mentre che 'l fummo l'uno e l'altro vela	118	While the smoke veils one and now the other

di color novo, e genera 'l pel suso	119	with new color and grows hair here

per l'una parte e da l'altra il dipela,	120	and elsewhere strips it off,

    l'un si levò e l'altro cadde giuso,	121	one of them rose to his feet, the other fell,

non torcendo però le lucerne empie,	122	but neither turned aside his baleful glare

sotto le quai ciascun cambiava muso.	123	under which each muzzle changed its shape.

    Quel ch'era dritto, il trasse ver' le tempie,	124	In the one erect it shrank in to the temples,

e di troppa matera ch'in là venne	125	and, from the excess flesh absorbed,

uscir li orecchi de le gote scempie;	126	two ears extruded from smooth cheeks.

    ciò che non corse in dietro e si ritenne	127	That which did not recede, the remnant

di quel soverchio, fé naso a la faccia	128	of that excess, made a nose for the face

e le labbra ingrossò quanto convenne.	129	and gave the lips a proper thickness.

    Quel che giacëa, il muso innanzi caccia,	130	The one prone on the ground shoves out his snout

e li orecchi ritira per la testa	131	and draws his ears into his head

come face le corna la lumaccia;	132	as a snail draws in its horns,

    e la lingua, ch'avëa unita e presta	133	and his tongue, till now a single thing

prima a parlar, si fende, e la forcuta	134	and fit for speech, divides, and the other's

ne l'altro si richiude; e 'l fummo resta.	135	forked tongue joins, and the smoke stops.

    L'anima ch'era fiera divenuta,	136	The soul just now become a brute takes flight,

suffolando si fugge per la valle,	137	hissing through the hollow, and the other,

e l'altro dietro a lui parlando sputa.	138	by way of speaking, spits after him.

    Poscia li volse le novelle spalle,	139	Then he turned his new-made shoulders and he said

e disse a l'altro: "I' vo' che Buoso corra,	140	to the third: 'I want Buoso to run, as I have done,

com' ho fatt' io, carpon per questo calle."	141	down on all fours along this road.'

    Così vid' io la settima zavorra	142	Thus I saw the seventh rabble change

mutare e trasmutare; e qui mi scusi	143	and change again, and let the newness of it

la novità se fior la penna abborra.	144	be my excuse if my pen has gone astray.

    E avvegna che li occhi miei confusi	145	And though my eyes were dazed

fossero alquanto e l'animo smagato,	146	and my mind somewhat bewildered,

non poter quei fuggirsi tanto chiusi,	147	these sinners could not flee so stealthily

    ch'i' non scorgessi ben Puccio Sciancato;	148	but I with ease discerned that Puccio Lameshanks,

ed era quel che sol, di tre compagni	149	and he alone, of the three companions

che venner prima, non era mutato;	150	in that group, remained unchanged.

l'altr' era quel che tu, Gaville, piagni.	151	The other, Gaville, was the one whom you lament.

Copyright © 1997-1998 The Trustees of Princeton University and Prof. Robert Hollander.
All Rights Reserved. Use of this site is governed by Terms and Conditions of Use/Legal Notices in connection with the use of this web site.
Thank you for visiting. And for reading the fine print. Bugs? Comments?

















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































commedia	minor works	multimedia	lectures	site info	help	search
