
PHILOLOGY Column Image.	COMMENTARY Column Image.	TOYNBEE Column Image.	DARTMOUTH DANTE PROJECT Column Image.	AUDIO Column Image.	IMAGES Column Image.
Move to the Princeton Dante Project home.	Move to the start of Canto 15
Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.
Move to the following Location: Par, Canto 14, Lines 1:200	Move to the Summary Page.	Move to the table of contents.	Move to the Search Page.	Move to the following Location: Par, Canto 16, Lines 1:200

    Benigna volontade in che si liqua	1	Benevolent will, in which a righteous love

sempre l'amor che drittamente spira,	2	whose breath is true must always show itself,

come cupidità fa ne la iniqua,	3	as does cupidity within an evil will,

    silenzio puose a quella dolce lira,	4	had silenced the sweet-sounding lyre

e fece quïetar le sante corde	5	and hushed the sacred strings that Heaven's right hand

che la destra del cielo allenta e tira.	6	loosens and draws taut.

    Come saranno a' giusti preghi sorde	7	How can they be deaf to righteous prayers,

quelle sustanze che, per darmi voglia	8	the very spirits who, to prompt my prayers,

ch'io le pregassi, a tacer fur concorde?	9	fell silent as with one accord?

    Bene è che sanza termine si doglia	10	It is well that endless be his grief

chi, per amor di cosa che non duri	11	who, for love of things that do not last,

etternalmente, quello amor si spoglia.	12	casts off a love that never dies.

    Quale per li seren tranquilli e puri	13	As through the clear and tranquil evening sky

discorre ad ora ad or sùbito foco,	14	from time to time a sudden fire will shoot,

movendo li occhi che stavan sicuri,	15	drawing the eyes that just before had calmly gazed,

    e pare stella che tramuti loco,	16	and seems a star escaping from its place --

se non che da la parte ond' e' s'accende	17	except from where it first was kindled

nulla sen perde, ed esso dura poco:	18	no star is missing and it lasts but a brief while --

    tale dal corno che 'n destro si stende	19	so from the arm of that great cross

a piè di quella croce corse un astro	20	extending on the right a star raced to the foot

de la costellazion che lì resplende;	21	of the resplendent constellation there.

    né si partì la gemma dal suo nastro,	22	Nor did this jewel leave its ribbon,

ma per la lista radïal trascorse,	23	but ran along the shining band so that

che parve foco dietro ad alabastro.	24	it seemed a flame that glows in alabaster.

    Sì pïa l'ombra d'Anchise si porse,	25	With such affection did Anchises' shade reach out,

se fede merta nostra maggior musa,	26	if our greatest muse is owed belief,

quando in Eliso del figlio s'accorse.	27	when in Elysium he knew his son.

    "O sanguis meus, O superinfusa	28	'O sanguis meus, o superinfusa

gratïa Deï, sicut tibi cui	29	gratïa Deï, sicut tibi cui

bis unquam celi ianüa reclusa?"	30	bis unquam celi ianüa reclusa?'

    Così quel lume: ond' io m'attesi a lui;	31	Thus spoke that light. And I gave heed,

poscia rivolsi a la mia donna il viso,	32	then turned my eyes back to my lady --

e quinci e quindi stupefatto fui;	33	whichever way I looked I was amazed,

    ché dentro a li occhi suoi ardeva un riso	34	for there glowed such a smile within her eyes

tal, ch'io pensai co' miei toccar lo fondo	35	I thought that with my own I had attained

de la mia gloria e del mio paradiso.	36	my ultimate bliss, my final paradise.

    Indi, a udire e a veder giocondo,	37	Then, a joy to hear and a joy to see,

giunse lo spirto al suo principio cose,	38	the spirit added to what first he said

ch'io non lo 'ntesi, sì parlò profondo;	39	words so profound I could not understand them.

    né per elezïon mi si nascose,	40	Nor did he hide his thoughts from me by choice

ma per necessità, ché 'l suo concetto	41	but by necessity, for his conceptions

al segno d'i mortal si soprapuose.	42	were set beyond our mortal limit.

    E quando l'arco de l'ardente affetto	43	And when his bow of ardent love

fu sì sfogato, che 'l parlar discese	44	relaxed enough to let his speech descend

inver' lo segno del nostro intelletto,	45	down toward the limits of our intellect,

    la prima cosa che per me s'intese,	46	the first thing I could understand was:

"Benedetto sia tu," fu, "trino e uno,	47	'May you be blessed, Threefold and One,

che nel mio seme se' tanto cortese!"	48	who show such favor to my seed!'

    E seguì: "Grato e lontano digiuno,	49	And he went on: 'That long and welcome craving,

tratto leggendo del magno volume	50	derived from reading in the massive book

du' non si muta mai bianco né bruno,	51	where neither black nor white is ever altered,

    solvuto hai, figlio, dentro a questo lume	52	'you have satisfied, my son, within this light

in ch'io ti parlo, mercé di colei	53	from which I speak to you by grace of her

ch'a l'alto volo ti vestì le piume.	54	who dressed you out in wings for this high flight.

    Tu credi che a me tuo pensier mei	55	'You think your thoughts flow into mine through Him

da quel ch'è primo, così come raia	56	who is the First, as from the number one

da l'un, se si conosce, il cinque e 'l sei;	57	will radiate the five and six, if one is known.

    e però ch'io mi sia e perch' io paia	58	'For that reason you do not ask me who I am

più gaudïoso a te, non mi domandi,	59	nor why I seem to you more filled with joy

che alcun altro in questa turba gaia.	60	than any other in this happy throng.

    Tu credi 'l vero; ché i minori e ' grandi	61	'And you are right, for the humble and the mighty

di questa vita miran ne lo speglio	62	up here in this life gaze into the mirror

in che, prima che pensi, il pensier pandi;	63	in which, before you think them, thoughts shine clear.

    ma perché 'l sacro amore in che io veglio	64	'But, that the sacred love, which keeps me watching

con perpetüa vista e che m'asseta	65	with enduring vision and makes me thirst

di dolce disïar, s'adempia meglio,	66	with sweet desire, may be more happily fulfilled,

    la voce tua sicura, balda e lieta	67	'let your voice resound sure, bold, and joyful,

suoni la volontà, suoni 'l disio,	68	to proclaim the will, proclaim the desire,

a che la mia risposta è già decreta!"	69	for which my answer is already set.'

    Io mi volsi a Beatrice, e quella udio	70	I turned to Beatrice, who had heard

pria ch'io parlassi, e arrisemi un cenno	71	before I spoke and smiled a sign

che fece crescer l'ali al voler mio.	72	that made my will put forth its wings.

    Poi cominciai così: "L'affetto e 'l senno,	73	And I began: 'Love and intelligence,

come la prima equalità v'apparse,	74	once the prime Equality appeared to you,

d'un peso per ciascun di voi si fenno,	75	then became yours in equal measure,

    però che 'l sol che v'allumò e arse,	76	'since that Sun that lit your way and made you warm

col caldo e con la luce è sì iguali,	77	distributes both its heat and light so evenly

che tutte simiglianze sono scarse.	78	that all comparisons fall short.

    Ma voglia e argomento ne' mortali,	79	'But for mortals, as you well know,

per la cagion ch'a voi è manifesta,	80	the will to act and the power to carry through

diversamente son pennuti in ali;	81	have wings that are not feathered equally,

    ond' io, che son mortal, mi sento in questa	82	'so that I, who am mortal, feel in myself

disagguaglianza, e però non ringrazio	83	this inequality and thus can only offer thanks

se non col core a la paterna festa.	84	for your paternal welcome with my heart.

    Ben supplico io a te, vivo topazio	85	'But I implore you, living topaz

che questa gioia prezïosa ingemmi,	86	set into this priceless ornament,

perché mi facci del tuo nome sazio."	87	that you reward my longing with your name.'

    "O fronda mia in che io compiacemmi	88	'O bough of my tree, in whom I have rejoiced

pur aspettando, io fui la tua radice":	89	even in expectation, I was your root.'

cotal principio, rispondendo, femmi.	90	Such was the preface of his words to me.

    Poscia mi disse: "Quel da cui si dice	91	Then: 'He from whom your house derives its name

tua cognazione e che cent' anni e piùe	92	and who for a hundred years and more

girato ha 'l monte in la prima cornice,	93	has circled the mountain on its lowest bank

    mio figlio fu e tuo bisavol fue:	94	'was your great-grandfather and my son.

ben si convien che la lunga fatica	95	It is most fitting that you shorten

tu li raccorci con l'opere tue.	96	his long and weary labor with your prayers.

    Fiorenza dentro da la cerchia antica,	97	'Florence, within the circle of her ancient walls

ond' ella toglie ancora e terza e nona,	98	from which she still hears tierce and nones,

si stava in pace, sobria e pudica.	99	dwelled then in peace, temperate and chaste.

    Non avea catenella, non corona,	100	'No bracelet, no tiara did she wear,

non gonne contigiate, non cintura	101	no embroidered gown, no waistband

che fosse a veder più che la persona.	102	more striking to the eye than was its wearer.

    Non faceva, nascendo, ancor paura	103	'Nor did a new-born daughter make her father fear,

la figlia al padre, ché 'l tempo e la dote	104	for marriage age and dowry were not yet extreme,

non fuggien quinci e quindi la misura.	105	the one too low, the other one too high.

    Non avea case di famiglia vòte;	106	'No houses then stood uninhabited,

non v'era giunto ancor Sardanapalo	107	nor had Sardanapalus as yet arrived

a mostrar ciò che 'n camera si puote.	108	to show what might be done behind closed doors.

    Non era vinto ancora Montemalo	109	'Not yet did your Uccellatoio surpass

dal vostro Uccellatoio, che, com'è vinto	110	in splendor Montemario but, exceeding

nel montar sù, così sarà nel calo.	111	in its rise, it shall surpass it in its fall.

    Bellincion Berti vid' io andar cinto	112	'I saw Bellincion Berti wear a belt of leather

di cuoio e d'osso, e venir da lo specchio	113	and plain bone, and saw his lady step back

la donna sua sanza 'l viso dipinto;	114	from the glass, her face untouched by paint.

    e vidi quel d'i Nerli e quel del Vecchio	115	'And I saw one of the Nerli and a del Vecchio

esser contenti a la pelle scoperta,	116	both content with wearing simple, unlined skins,

e le sue donne al fuso e al pennecchio.	117	their ladies busy with their spindles and their flax.

    Oh fortunate! ciascuna era certa	118	'O fortunate women! Each knew for certain

de la sua sepultura, e ancor nulla	119	where she would be buried, nor was any yet

era per Francia nel letto diserta.	120	forsaken in her bed at France's call.

    L'una vegghiava a studio de la culla,	121	'One kept eager watch upon the cradle,

e, consolando, usava l'idïoma	122	using sounds and words that first delight

che prima i padri e le madri trastulla;	123	fathers and mothers when they soothe their child.

    l'altra, traendo a la rocca la chioma,	124	'Another, while drawing the wool from its spool,

favoleggiava con la sua famiglia	125	would delight her household with the tales

d'i Troiani, di Fiesole e di Roma.	126	of Troy, Fiesole, and Rome.

    Saria tenuta allor tal maraviglia	127	'A Cianghella or a Lapo Salterello,

una Cianghella, un Lapo Salterello,	128	in those days would have caused the same surprise

qual or saria Cincinnato e Corniglia.	129	as now would Cincinnatus or Cornelia.

    A così riposato, a così bello	130	'It was to a municipal life so peaceful

viver di cittadini, a così fida	131	and so fair, to a citizenry so loyal,

cittadinanza, a così dolce ostello,	132	to so sweet a place to live,

    Maria mi diè, chiamata in alte grida;	133	'that Mary gave me when invoked with cries

e ne l'antico vostro Batisteo	134	of childbirth, and in your ancient Baptistry,

insieme fui cristiano e Cacciaguida.	135	I was at once Cacciaguida and a Christian.

    Moronto fu mio frate ed Eliseo;	136	'Moronto was my brother, as was Eliseo.

mia donna venne a me di val di Pado,	137	My wife came from the valley of the Po,

e quindi il sopranome tuo si feo.	138	and from her you took the surname that you bear.

    Poi seguitai lo 'mperador Currado;	139	'Later, I became a partisan of Emperor Conrad,

ed el mi cinse de la sua milizia,	140	who girded me to be his knight

tanto per bene ovrar li venni in grado.	141	once, with my faithful service, I had won his favor.

    Dietro li andai incontro a la nequizia	142	'I followed him to oppose the iniquity

di quella legge il cui popolo usurpa,	143	of that false creed whose people, by the failure

per colpa d'i pastor, vostra giustizia.	144	of your shepherds, usurp your right.

    Quivi fu' io da quella gente turpa	145	'There was I freed by that foul race

disviluppato dal mondo fallace,	146	from all the snares of the deceitful world --

lo cui amor molt'anime deturpa;	147	the love of which corrupts so many souls --

e venni dal martiro a questa pace."	148	and came from being martyred to this peace.'

Copyright © 1997-1998 The Trustees of Princeton University and Prof. Robert Hollander.
All Rights Reserved. Use of this site is governed by Terms and Conditions of Use/Legal Notices in connection with the use of this web site.
Thank you for visiting. And for reading the fine print. Bugs? Comments?



























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































commedia	minor works	multimedia	lectures	site info	help	search
