
PHILOLOGY Column Image.	COMMENTARY Column Image.	TOYNBEE Column Image.	DARTMOUTH DANTE PROJECT Column Image.	AUDIO Column Image.	IMAGES Column Image.
Move to the Princeton Dante Project home.	Move to the start of Canto 18
Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.
Move to the following Location: Par, Canto 17, Lines 1:200	Move to the Summary Page.	Move to the table of contents.	Move to the Search Page.	Move to the following Location: Par, Canto 19, Lines 1:200

    Già si godeva solo del suo verbo	1	That blessèd mirror continued to rejoice

quello specchio beato, e io gustava	2	in his own thoughts and I was tasting mine,

lo mio, temprando col dolce l'acerbo;	3	tempering the bitter with the sweet,

    e quella donna ch'a Dio mi menava	4	when that lady, who was leading me to God,

disse: "Muta pensier; pensa ch'i' sono	5	said: 'Change your thoughts. Consider that I dwell

presso a colui ch'ogne torto disgrava."	6	with Him who lifts the weight of every wrong.'

    Io mi rivolsi a l'amoroso suono	7	At the loving sound of my comfort's voice

del mio conforto; e qual io allor vidi	8	I turned, and the great love I saw then,

ne li occhi santi amor, qui l'abbandono:	9	in her holy eyes, I have to leave untold,

    non perch' io pur del mio parlar diffidi,	10	not just because I cannot trust my speech,

ma per la mente che non può redire	11	but because memory cannot retrace its path

sovra sé tanto, s'altri non la guidi.	12	that far unless Another guide it.

    Tanto poss' io di quel punto ridire,	13	This much only of that moment can I tell again,

che, rimirando lei, lo mio affetto	14	that, when I fixed my gaze on her,

libero fu da ogne altro disire,	15	my affections were released from any other longing

    fin che 'l piacere etterno, che diretto	16	as long as the eternal Beauty,

raggiava in Bëatrice, dal bel viso	17	shining its light on Beatrice, made me content

mi contentava col secondo aspetto.	18	with its reflected glow in her fair eyes.

    Vincendo me col lume d'un sorriso,	19	Conquering me with her radiant smile,

ella mi disse: "Volgiti e ascolta;	20	she said: 'Turn now and listen:

ché non pur ne' miei occhi è paradiso."	21	not in my eyes alone is Paradise.'

    Come si vede qui alcuna volta	22	As, on occasion, here on earth, affection

l'affetto ne la vista, s'elli è tanto,	23	may be read in someone's face

che da lui sia tutta l'anima tolta,	24	if it is strong enough to capture all the soul,

    così nel fiammeggiar del folgór santo,	25	so, in the flaming of that holy radiance

a ch'io mi volsi, conobbi la voglia	26	to which I turned, I recognized his wish

in lui di ragionarmi ancora alquanto.	27	to share some further thoughts with me.

    El cominciò: "In questa quinta soglia	28	And he began: 'On this fifth tier of the branches

de l'albero che vive de la cima	29	of the tree that draws its sustenance from above

e frutta sempre e mai non perde foglia,	30	and always is in fruit and never sheds its leaves

    spiriti son beati, che giù, prima	31	'are blessèd spirits who below, on earth,

che venissero al ciel, fuor di gran voce,	32	before they rose to Heaven, were of such renown

sì ch'ogne musa ne sarebbe opima.	33	that any poet's page would be enriched by them.

    Però mira ne' corni de la croce:	34	'Look, therefore, at the two arms of the cross,

quello ch'io nomerò, lì farà l'atto	35	and each one whom I name will, flashing, dart

che fa in nube il suo foco veloce."	36	as does swift fire from within a cloud.'

    Io vidi per la croce un lume tratto	37	I saw a streak of light drawn through the cross

dal nomar Iosuè, com' el si feo;	38	at Joshua's name as soon as it was spoken,

né mi fu noto il dir prima che 'l fatto.	39	nor could I tell the naming and the deed apart.

    E al nome de l'alto Macabeo	40	And, at the name of valorous Maccabaeus,

vidi moversi un altro roteando,	41	I saw shoot by another whirling light --

e letizia era ferza del paleo.	42	and it was joy that whipped that spinning top.

    Così per Carlo Magno e per Orlando	43	My watchful gaze was fastened

due ne seguì lo mio attento sguardo,	44	on Charlemagne and Roland there, as well,

com' occhio segue suo falcon volando.	45	just as the eye pursues the falcon in its flight.

    Poscia trasse Guiglielmo e Rinoardo	46	William, Renouard, and then Duke Godfrey

e 'l duca Gottifredi la mia vista	47	next drew my eyes along that cross,

per quella croce, e Ruberto Guiscardo.	48	and Robert Guiscard also did so.

    Indi, tra l'altre luci mota e mista,	49	Then, leaving me to mingle with the other lights,

mostrommi l'alma che m'avea parlato	50	the soul who'd spoken last with me displayed

qual era tra i cantor del cielo artista.	51	his artistry among the singers of that heaven.

    Io mi rivolsi dal mio destro lato	52	I turned to my right to learn

per vedere in Beatrice il mio dovere,	53	from Beatrice what I ought to do,

o per parlare o per atto, segnato;	54	whether signaled by some word or gesture,

    e vidi le sue luci tanto mere,	55	and I saw her eyes so clear, so joyful,

tanto gioconde, che la sua sembianza	56	that her aspect in its radiance outshone

vinceva li altri e l'ultimo solere.	57	her former glory, even that most recent.

    E come, per sentir più dilettanza	58	And as, from feeling more delight in doing good,

bene operando, l'uom di giorno in giorno	59	a man becomes aware from day to day

s'accorge che la sua virtute avanza,	60	of his increasing virtue,

    sì m'accors' io che 'l mio girare intorno	61	seeing that miracle adorned with greater brightness,

col cielo insieme avea cresciuto l'arco,	62	I became aware my wheeling circles

veggendo quel miracol più addorno.	63	through the heavens had grown wider in their arc.

    E qual è 'l trasmutare in picciol varco	64	And such a change as passes in a moment

di tempo in bianca donna, quando 'l volto	65	from the blushing face of a fair-skinned lady,

suo si discarchi di vergogna il carco,	66	unburdened of the reason for her shame,

    tal fu ne li occhi miei, quando fui vòlto,	67	greeted my eyes once I had turned around,

per lo candor de la temprata stella	68	because of the white radiance of the temperate

sesta, che dentro a sé m'avea ricolto.	69	sixth star, which had gathered me into itself.

    Io vidi in quella giovïal facella	70	In that torch of Jupiter I watched

lo sfavillar de l'amor che lì era	71	the sparkling of the love resplendent there

segnare a li occhi miei nostra favella.	72	make signs, before my eyes, of our speech.

    E come augelli surti di rivera,	73	And as birds risen from the river's edge,

quasi congratulando a lor pasture,	74	seeming to celebrate their pleasure in their food,

fanno di sé or tonda or altra schiera,	75	form now a rounded arc, and now another shape,

    sì dentro ai lumi sante creature	76	so, radiant within their lights, the holy creatures

volitando cantavano, e faciensi	77	sang as they flew and shaped themselves

or D, or I, or L in sue figure.	78	in figures, now D, now I, now L.

    Prima, cantando, a sua nota moviensi;	79	At first, singing, they danced to their own tune.

poi, diventando l'un di questi segni,	80	And then, taking on one of these shapes,

un poco s'arrestavano e taciensi.	81	they paused in their movement and were silent.

    O diva Pegasëa che li 'ngegni	82	O divine Pegasean, who bestow glory

fai glorïosi e rendili longevi,	83	and long life on genius, as, with your help,

ed essi teco le cittadi e ' regni,	84	it gives life to towns and kingdoms,

    illustrami di te, sì ch'io rilevi	85	inspire me with your light so that I may set down

le lor figure com' io l'ho concette:	86	their shapes as I conceived them in my mind.

paia tua possa in questi versi brevi!	87	May your power appear in these few lines.

    Mostrarsi dunque in cinque volte sette	88	They then displayed themselves in five times seven

vocali e consonanti; e io notai	89	consonants and vowels, and I saw these letters

le parti sì, come mi parver dette.	90	singly, and in the order they were traced.

    "DILIGITE IUSTITIAM," primai	91	DILIGITE IUSTITIAM -- these letters,

fur verbo e nome di tutto 'l dipinto;	92	placed together, verb and noun, came first,

"QUI IUDICATIS TERRAM," fur sezzai.	93	QUI IUDICATIS TERRAM, last.

    Poscia ne l'emme del vocabol quinto	94	Then they came to rest in the fifth word's M

rimasero ordinate; sì che Giove	95	so that this place in Jupiter was shining

pareva argento lì d'oro distinto.	96	as does silver overlaid with gold.

    E vidi scendere altre luci dove	97	And I saw other lights descend and settle

era il colmo de l'emme, e lì quetarsi	98	on the M's high crest to sing, I think,

cantando, credo, il ben ch'a sé le move.	99	of that great Good which draws them to Itself.

    Poi, come nel percuoter d'i ciocchi arsi	100	Then, as when someone strikes a burning log,

surgono innumerabili faville,	101	causing innumerable sparks to fly,

onde li stolti sogliono agurarsi,	102	sparks from which the foolish form their divinations,

    resurger parver quindi più di mille	103	just so a thousand lights and more appeared

luci e salir, qual assai e qual poco,	104	to rise from there and mount, some more, some less,

sì come 'l sol che l'accende sortille;	105	as the Sun that kindles them ordained.

    e quïetata ciascuna in suo loco,	106	When each had settled in its place

la testa e 'l collo d'un'aguglia vidi	107	I saw an eagle's head and neck

rappresentare a quel distinto foco.	108	take shape out of that overlay of fire.

    Quei che dipinge lì, non ha chi 'l guidi;	109	He who fashions there has need of none to guide Him

ma esso guida, e da lui si rammenta	110	but Himself. Thus we recognize as His

quella virtù ch'è forma per li nidi.	111	the form that every bird takes for its nest.

    L'altra bëatitudo, che contenta	112	The other blessèd spirits, who seemed at first content

pareva prima d'ingigliarsi a l'emme,	113	to turn themselves into a lily on the M,

con poco moto seguitò la 'mprenta.	114	with gentle motion joined, completing the design.

    O dolce stella, quali e quante gemme	115	O lovely star, how many and how bright the jewels

mi dimostraro che nostra giustizia	116	that showed me that our earthly justice

effetto sia del ciel che tu ingemme!	117	comes from that heaven, brilliant with your gems!

    Per ch'io prego la mente in che s'inizia	118	Therefore, I entreat the Mind, in which your motion

tuo moto e tua virtute, che rimiri	119	and your power begin, to look down on the source

ond' esce il fummo che 'l tuo raggio vizia;	120	of smoke that dims your radiant beam,

    sì ch'un'altra fiata omai s'adiri	121	so that your wrath come down once more

del comperare e vender dentro al templo	122	on those who buy and sell within the temple,

che si murò di segni e di martìri.	123	whose walls were built of miracle and martyrdom.

    O milizia del ciel cu' io contemplo,	124	O soldiery of Heaven, whom I contemplate,

adora per color che sono in terra	125	pray for those still on the earth,

tutti svïati dietro al malo essemplo!	126	those led astray by bad example!

    Già si solea con le spade far guerra;	127	It was the custom once to go to war with swords.

ma or si fa togliendo or qui or quivi	128	Now wars are fought withholding here and there

lo pan che 'l pïo Padre a nessun serra.	129	the bread our loving Father keeps from none.

    Ma tu che sol per cancellare scrivi,	130	But you who write only to cancel,

pensa che Pietro e Paulo, che moriro	131	remember this: Peter and Paul, who died

per la vigna che guasti, ancor son vivi.	132	to save the vineyard you lay waste, still live.

    Ben puoi tu dire: "I' ho fermo 'l disiro	133	Well may you say: 'I have so set my heart

sì a colui che volle viver solo	134	on him who chose to live in solitude

e che per salti fu tratto al martiro,	135	and who for a dance was dragged to martyrdom

ch'io non conosco il pescator né Polo."	136	that I know neither the Fisherman nor Paul.'

Copyright © 1997-1998 The Trustees of Princeton University and Prof. Robert Hollander.
All Rights Reserved. Use of this site is governed by Terms and Conditions of Use/Legal Notices in connection with the use of this web site.
Thank you for visiting. And for reading the fine print. Bugs? Comments?




















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































commedia	minor works	multimedia	lectures	site info	help	search
