
PHILOLOGY Column Image.	COMMENTARY Column Image.	TOYNBEE Column Image.	DARTMOUTH DANTE PROJECT Column Image.	AUDIO Column Image.	IMAGES Column Image.
Move to the Princeton Dante Project home.	Move to the start of Canto 11
Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.
Move to the following Location: Par, Canto 10, Lines 1:200	Move to the Summary Page.	Move to the table of contents.	Move to the Search Page.	Move to the following Location: Par, Canto 12, Lines 1:200

    O insensata cura de' mortali,	1	O foolish cares of mortals, how flawed

quanto son difettivi silogismi	2	are all the arguments that make you flap

quei che ti fanno in basso batter l'ali!	3	your wings in downward flight

    Chi dietro a iura e chi ad amforismi	4	One pursued the law, one the Hippocratic

sen giva, e chi seguendo sacerdozio,	5	Aphorisms, while yet another sought

e chi regnar per forza o per sofismi,	6	the priesthood, and another, rule by force or fraud,

    e chi rubare e chi civil negozio,	7	one was set on plunder, one on the public weal,

chi nel diletto de la carne involto	8	one wearied himself in the toils of flesh

s'affaticava e chi si dava a l'ozio,	9	and its delights, another gave himself to idleness,

    quando, da tutte queste cose sciolto,	10	while I, set free from all these things,

con Bëatrice m'era suso in cielo	11	was, high in heaven with Beatrice,

cotanto glorïosamente accolto.	12	thus gloriously received.

    Poi che ciascuno fu tornato ne lo	13	When each flame had returned to the same point

punto del cerchio in che avanti s'era,	14	on the circle where it had stood before,

fermossi, come a candellier candelo.	15	it stopped, like a candle on its sconce,

    E io senti' dentro a quella lumera	16	and now the light that had already spoken

che pria m'avea parlato, sorridendo	17	from deep within began again to speak,

incominciar, faccendosi più mera:	18	smiling and shining still more bright:

    "Così com' io del suo raggio resplendo,	19	'Even as I reflect its radiant beams, so,

sì, riguardando ne la luce etterna,	20	gazing into the Eternal Light, I grasp

li tuoi pensieri onde cagioni apprendo.	21	your thoughts and the source of their beginnings.

    Tu dubbi, e hai voler che si ricerna	22	'You are in doubt and would have me restate

in sì aperta e 'n sì distesa lingua	23	my words, to make them clear and plain,

lo dicer mio, ch'al tuo sentir si sterna,	24	matching the level of your understanding,

    ove dinanzi dissi: 'U' ben s'impingua,'	25	'as when I said, "Where sheep are fattened,"

e là u' dissi: 'Non nacque il secondo';	26	as well as, "Nor was there ever born another."

e qui è uopo che ben si distingua.	27	And here one needs to make a clear distinction.

    La provedenza, che governa il mondo	28	'The providence that rules the world

con quel consiglio nel quale ogne aspetto	29	with such deep wisdom that any God-created eye

creato è vinto pria che vada al fondo,	30	must fail before it reaches to the very depth --

    però che andasse ver' lo suo diletto	31	'so that the bride of Him who, crying out

la sposa di colui ch'ad alte grida	32	in a loud voice, espoused her with His sacred blood,

disposò lei col sangue benedetto,	33	should go in joy to her belovèd

    in sé sicura e anche a lui più fida,	34	'sure of herself and now to Him more faithful --

due principi ordinò in suo favore,	35	ordained in her behalf two princes,

che quinci e quindi le fosser per guida.	36	one on this side, one on that, to serve as guides.

    L'un fu tutto serafico in ardore;	37	'One was all seraphic in his ardor,

l'altro per sapïenza in terra fue	38	the other, by his wisdom, was on earth

di cherubica luce uno splendore.	39	resplendent with cherubic light.

    De l'un dirò, però che d'amendue	40	'I shall speak of one, since praising one,

si dice l'un pregiando, qual ch'om prende,	41	whichever one we choose, is to speak of both,

perch' ad un fine fur l'opere sue.	42	for they labored to a single end.

    Intra Tupino e l'acqua che discende	43	'Between the Topino and the waters that descend

del colle eletto dal beato Ubaldo,	44	down from the hilltop chosen by the blessèd Ubaldo

fertile costa d'alto monte pende,	45	there hangs a fertile slope from one high peak

    onde Perugia sente freddo e caldo	46	'that makes Perugia feel both heat and cold

da Porta Sole; e di rietro le piange	47	at Porta Sole, while behind its other flank

per grave giogo Nocera con Gualdo.	48	Gualdo and Nocera mourn their heavy yoke.

    Di questa costa, là dov' ella frange	49	'From this slope, where it interrupts

più sua rattezza, nacque al mondo un sole,	50	its steep descent, a sun rose on the world,

come fa questo talvolta di Gange.	51	as from the Ganges our sun sometimes does.

    Però chi d'esso loco fa parole,	52	'Therefore, let anyone who would speak of this place

non dica Ascesi, ché direbbe corto,	53	not say Ascesi, which would convey too little,

ma Orïente, se proprio dir vuole.	54	but call it Orient, to sound its proper worth.

    Non era ancor molto lontan da l'orto,	55	'Not much time as yet had passed

ch'el cominciò a far sentir la terra	56	when he first lent his comfort to the earth

de la sua gran virtute alcun conforto;	57	by the greatness of his virtuous power.

    ché per tal donna, giovinetto, in guerra	58	'For, still a youth, he fought against his father's wish

del padre corse, a cui, come a la morte,	59	for the favor of a lady to whom, as to death,

la porta del piacer nessun diserra;	60	no one unlocks the door with gladness,

    e dinanzi a la sua spirital corte	61	'and before his spiritual court et coram patre

et coram patre le si fece unito;	62	he joined himself to her and, from then on,

poscia di dì in dì l'amò più forte.	63	each passing day, he loved her more.

    Questa, privata del primo marito,	64	'She, bereft of her first husband, scorned and unknown

millecent' anni e più dispetta e scura	65	one thousand and one hundred years and more,

fino a costui si stette sanza invito;	66	remained without a suitor till he came.

    né valse udir che la trovò sicura	67	'Nor did it profit her when men heard that she stood

con Amiclate, al suon de la sua voce,	68	unmoved, with Amyclas, despite the voice

colui ch'a tutto 'l mondo fé paura;	69	of him who put the whole wide world in fear.

    né valse esser costante né feroce,	70	'Nor did it profit her when, being fiercely loyal

sì che, dove Maria rimase giuso,	71	and undaunted, while Mary stayed below,

ella con Cristo pianse in su la croce.	72	she wept with Christ upon the cross.

    Ma perch' io non proceda troppo chiuso,	73	'But, lest I make my meaning dark,

Francesco e Povertà per questi amanti	74	let it be understood, in all that I have said,

prendi oramai nel mio parlar diffuso.	75	that these two lovers are Francis and Poverty.

    La lor concordia e i lor lieti sembianti,	76	'Their happy countenances and their harmony,

amore e maraviglia e dolce sguardo	77	their love and wonder and sweet contemplation

facieno esser cagion di pensier santi;	78	made them a cause for holy thoughts,

    tanto che 'l venerabile Bernardo	79	'so that the venerable Bernard was the first

si scalzò prima, e dietro a tanta pace	80	to shed his shoes and run, pursuing such great peace,

corse e, correndo, li parve esser tardo.	81	and, running, thought himself too slow.

    Oh ignota ricchezza! oh ben ferace!	82	'O unknown riches and prolific good Barefoot goes Giles,

Scalzasi Egidio, scalzasi Silvestro	83	barefoot goes Sylvester, following the groom,

dietro a lo sposo, sì la sposa piace.	84	so greatly pleasing is the bride.

    Indi sen va quel padre e quel maestro	85	'Then that father and teacher went his way

con la sua donna e con quella famiglia	86	in company of his lady and that family,

che già legava l'umile capestro.	87	each one girt with the same humble cord.

    Né li gravò viltà di cuor le ciglia	88	'Nor did an unworthy shame weigh on his brow

per esser fi' di Pietro Bernardone,	89	for being Pietro Bernardone's son,

né per parer dispetto a maraviglia;	90	nor for being an object of amazed contempt,

    ma regalmente sua dura intenzione	91	'but he regally laid bare his stern resolve

ad Innocenzio aperse, e da lui ebbe	92	to Innocent and, from him, he received

primo sigillo a sua religïone.	93	the first seal of his order.

    Poi che la gente poverella crebbe	94	'When his followers, sworn to poverty,

dietro a costui, la cui mirabil vita	95	increased their number, he, whose admirable life

meglio in gloria del ciel si canterebbe,	96	were better sung in the glorious realm of Heaven,

    di seconda corona redimita	97	'was affirmed with a second crown

fu per Onorio da l'Etterno Spiro	98	by the eternal Breath, through Honorius,

la santa voglia d'esto archimandrita.	99	in his holy purpose as shepherd of this flock.

    E poi che, per la sete del martiro,	100	'And when, in his thirst for martyrdom,

ne la presenza del Soldan superba	101	he preached Christ and the Apostles who came after

predicò Cristo e li altri che 'l seguiro,	102	in the proud presence of the Sultan,

    e per trovare a conversione acerba	103	'finding the people unripe for conversion

troppo la gente e per non stare indarno,	104	and unwilling to remain to no good purpose,

redissi al frutto de l'italica erba,	105	he returned to reap the harvest of Italian fields.

    nel crudo sasso intra Tevero e Arno	106	'On the harsh rock between the Tiber and the Arno

da Cristo prese l'ultimo sigillo,	107	from Christ he had the final seal, then for two years

che le sue membra due anni portarno.	108	he bore His wounds upon his limbs.

    Quando a colui ch'a tanto ben sortillo	109	'When He who had chosen him for so much good

piacque di trarlo suso a la mercede	110	was pleased to take him to the high reward

ch'el meritò nel suo farsi pusillo,	111	that he had won with his devoted meekness,

    a' frati suoi, sì com' a giuste rede,	112	'he recommended his most cherished lady

raccomandò la donna sua più cara,	113	to his brothers, as to his rightful heirs,

e comandò che l'amassero a fede;	114	commanding them to love her faithfully.

    e del suo grembo l'anima preclara	115	'From his lady's bosom the illustrious soul

mover si volle, tornando al suo regno,	116	chose to set forth, returning to its kingdom,

e al suo corpo non volle altra bara.	117	and for its corpse would have no other bier.

    Pensa oramai qual fu colui che degno	118	'Now think what kind of man it took

collega fu a mantener la barca	119	to be a fit companion to maintain

di Pietro in alto mar per dritto segno;	120	the steadfast course of Peter's bark upon the sea,

    e questo fu il nostro patrïarca;	121	'and just such was our patriarch. From this

per che qual segue lui, com' el comanda,	122	you may perceive that he who follows him

discerner puoi che buone merce carca.	123	as he commands is freighted with good cargo.

    Ma 'l suo pecuglio di nova vivanda	124	'But his flock has grown so greedy

è fatto ghiotto, sì ch'esser non puote	125	for new sustenance that it is forced

che per diversi salti non si spanda;	126	to scatter through remote and distant pastures,

    e quanto le sue pecore remote	127	'and the farther his sheep go wandering off

e vagabunde più da esso vanno,	128	from him, the emptier of milk

più tornano a l'ovil di latte vòte.	129	do they at last come back into the fold.

    Ben son di quelle che temono 'l danno	130	'There are some, indeed, who, fearing harm,

e stringonsi al pastor; ma son sì poche,	131	huddle near the shepherd, but these are so few

che le cappe fornisce poco panno.	132	that a tiny piece of cloth can furnish all their cowls.

    Or, se le mie parole non son fioche,	133	'And so, if my words are not too dark,

se la tua audïenza è stata attenta,	134	and if your ears have been intent,

se ciò ch'è detto a la mente revoche,	135	and if you can recall exactly what was said,

    in parte fia la tua voglia contenta,	136	'then shall your wish be in part fulfilled

perché vedrai la pianta onde si scheggia,	137	and you shall see the reason why the plant is cleft

e vedra' il corrègger che argomenta	138	and what is meant by the rebuke

'U' ben s'impingua, se non si vaneggia.'"	139	where sheep are fattened if they do not stray.'

Copyright © 1997-1998 The Trustees of Princeton University and Prof. Robert Hollander.
All Rights Reserved. Use of this site is governed by Terms and Conditions of Use/Legal Notices in connection with the use of this web site.
Thank you for visiting. And for reading the fine print. Bugs? Comments?






























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































commedia	minor works	multimedia	lectures	site info	help	search
