
PHILOLOGY Column Image.	COMMENTARY Column Image.	TOYNBEE Column Image.	DARTMOUTH DANTE PROJECT Column Image.	AUDIO Column Image.	IMAGES Column Image.
Move to the Princeton Dante Project home.	Move to the start of Canto 12
Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.
Move to the following Location: Par, Canto 11, Lines 1:200	Move to the Summary Page.	Move to the table of contents.	Move to the Search Page.	Move to the following Location: Par, Canto 13, Lines 1:200

    Sì tosto come l'ultima parola	1	As soon as the blessèd flame

la benedetta fiamma per dir tolse,	2	had spoken its last word

a rotar cominciò la santa mola;	3	the holy millstone once again began to wheel,

    e nel suo giro tutta non si volse	4	and had not yet come full around

prima ch'un'altra di cerchio la chiuse,	5	before another circle closed it in,

e moto a moto e canto a canto colse;	6	matching it motion for motion and song for song,

    canto che tanto vince nostre muse,	7	song that, heard from such sweet instruments,

nostre serene in quelle dolci tube,	8	as far excels our muses and our sirens

quanto primo splendor quel ch'e' refuse.	9	as a first shining its reflected rays.

    Come si volgon per tenera nube	10	As twin rainbows, parallel in shape and color,

due archi paralelli e concolori,	11	arc in their pathway through translucent clouds

quando Iunone a sua ancella iube,	12	when Juno gives the order to her handmaid --

    nascendo di quel d'entro quel di fori,	13	the outer one born of the inner,

a guisa del parlar di quella vaga	14	like the voice of that wandering nymph

ch'amor consunse come sol vapori,	15	whom love consumed as the sun does vapors --

    e fanno qui la gente esser presaga,	16	and allow the people here on earth to know the future

per lo patto che Dio con Noè puose,	17	because of the covenant God made with Noah,

del mondo che già mai più non s'allaga:	18	that the world would not again be flooded,

    così di quelle sempiterne rose	19	so the two wreaths of those eternal roses

volgiensi circa noi le due ghirlande,	20	circled all around us and, thus reflected,

e sì l'estrema a l'intima rispuose.	21	the outer circle shone in answer to the inner.

    Poi che 'l tripudio e l'altra festa grande,	22	When the dance and all the other celebration --

sì del cantare e sì del fiammeggiarsi	23	the singing and the brilliant blaze of flames,

luce con luce gaudïose e blande,	24	light with light blent in ardent joy --

    insieme a punto e a voler quetarsi,	25	came to a stop together and of one accord,

pur come li occhi ch'al piacer che i move	26	as eyes, when beauty moves them,

conviene insieme chiudere e levarsi;	27	must open wide or close as one,

    del cor de l'una de le luci nove	28	from the core of one of these new lights,

si mosse voce, che l'ago a la stella	29	as the north star makes a compass needle veer,

parer mi fece in volgermi al suo dove;	30	rose a voice that made me turn to where it came from.

    e cominciò: "L'amor che mi fa bella	31	And it began: 'The love that makes me beautiful

mi tragge a ragionar de l'altro duca	32	bids me, in turn, to laud that other leader

per cui del mio sì ben ci si favella.	33	because of whom my own has won such praise.

    Degno è che, dov' è l'un, l'altro s'induca:	34	'It is fitting that, in naming one, we name the other

sì che, com' elli ad una militaro,	35	so that, just as they were joined as one in combat

così la gloria loro insieme luca.	36	with a single goal, their fame should shine as one.

    L'essercito di Cristo, che sì caro	37	'Rearmed at such high cost, the troops of Christ

costò a rïarmar, dietro a la 'nsegna	38	moved with halting steps behind the standard,

si movea tardo, sospeccioso e raro,	39	full of doubt and few in number,

    quando lo 'mperador che sempre regna	40	'when the Emperor who reigns forever

provide a la milizia, ch'era in forse,	41	provided for His soldiers in their peril --

per sola grazia, non per esser degna;	42	only of His grace, not for their merit --

    e, come è detto, a sua sposa soccorse	43	'and, as was said, gave comfort to His bride

con due campioni, al cui fare, al cui dire	44	through these two champions, whose deeds and words

lo popol disvïato si raccorse.	45	brought together the scattered people.

    In quella parte ove surge ad aprire	46	'In that place where gentle Zephyr's breath

Zefiro dolce le novelle fronde	47	rises to open the unfolding leaves

di che si vede Europa rivestire,	48	in which Europe sees herself reclad,

    non molto lungi al percuoter de l'onde	49	'not far from the pounding waves

dietro a le quali, per la lunga foga,	50	beyond which the sun, having finished his long course,

lo sol talvolta ad ogne uom si nasconde,	51	sometimes hides himself from human sight,

    siede la fortunata Calaroga	52	'favored Calaroga lies

sotto la protezion del grande scudo	53	behind the shelter of the noble shield

in che soggiace il leone e soggioga:	54	that shows one lion in defeat and one in triumph.

    dentro vi nacque l'amoroso drudo	55	'In that town was born the amorous lover

de la fede cristiana, il santo atleta	56	of the Christian faith, the holy athlete,

benigno a' suoi e a' nemici crudo;	57	gentle to his own and savage to his foes.

    e come fu creata, fu repleta	58	'His mind, at the moment of its making,

sì la sua mente di viva vertute,	59	was so full of living power that,

che, ne la madre, lei fece profeta.	60	yet in his mother's womb, he made of her a prophet.

    Poi che le sponsalizie fuor compiute	61	'After his nuptials with the Faith

al sacro fonte intra lui e la Fede,	62	were celebrated at the holy font

u' si dotar di mutüa salute,	63	at which each dowered the other's safety,

    la donna che per lui l'assenso diede,	64	'the lady who offered her assent for his

vide nel sonno il mirabile frutto	65	saw in a dream the admirable fruit

ch'uscir dovea di lui e de le rede;	66	destined to spring from him and from his heirs.

    e perché fosse qual era in costrutto,	67	'And, that he might be known as what he was indeed,

quinci si mosse spirito a nomarlo	68	a spirit from Heaven came and named him

del possessivo di cui era tutto.	69	from the possessive form of Him whose he already was.

    Domenico fu detto; e io ne parlo	70	'He was called Dominic, and I shall speak of him

sì come de l'agricola che Cristo	71	as that laborer chosen by Christ

elesse a l'orto suo per aiutarlo.	72	to help Him dress and keep His garden.

    Ben parve messo e famigliar di Cristo:	73	'He seemed indeed a messenger and intimate of Christ,

ché 'l primo amor che 'n lui fu manifesto,	74	since the first affection manifest in him

fu al primo consiglio che diè Cristo.	75	was for the initial precept taught by Christ.

    Spesse fïate fu tacito e desto	76	'Many a time did his nurse find him

trovato in terra da la sua nutrice,	77	awake and silent on the ground,

come dicesse: 'Io son venuto a questo.'	78	as if he said, "It is for this I have come."

    Oh padre suo veramente Felice!	79	'O happy father, indeed Felix!

oh madre sua veramente Giovanna,	80	O blessèd mother, indeed Giovanna,

se, interpretata, val come si dice!	81	if, rightly construed, her name means what they say!

    Non per lo mondo, per cui mo s'affanna	82	'Not for this world, for which men toil today,

di retro ad Ostïense e a Taddeo,	83	following Taddeo and the Ostian,

ma per amor de la verace manna	84	but for love of the true manna,

    in picciol tempo gran dottor si feo;	85	'he soon became a teacher so renowned

tal che si mise a circüir la vigna	86	that he began to travel through the vineyard,

che tosto imbianca, se 'l vignaio è reo.	87	which quickly withers if the keeper is corrupt.

    E a la sedia che fu già benigna	88	'And to the papal seat, not now as benevolent

più a' poveri giusti, non per lei,	89	to the upright poor as it was once -- not flawed in itself,

ma per colui che siede, che traligna,	90	but degenerate in its occupant -- he made appeal,

    non dispensare o due o tre per sei,	91	'not to give away just two or three instead of six,

non la fortuna di prima vacante,	92	not for his chance at the first vacancy,

non decimas, quae sunt pauperum Dei,	93	not for the decimas, quae sunt pauperum Dei,

    addimandò, ma contro al mondo errante	94	'but for the privilege of fighting

licenza di combatter per lo seme	95	against the errors of the world, thus to preserve the seed

del qual ti fascian ventiquattro piante.	96	of the twenty-four plants now wreathing you in light.

    Poi, con dottrina e con volere insieme,	97	'Then, both with learning and with zeal,

con l'officio appostolico si mosse	98	secure in apostolic office, he went forth,

quasi torrente ch'alta vena preme;	99	like a torrent gushing from its lofty source,

    e ne li sterpi eretici percosse	100	'and fell upon the tangled weeds of heresy,

l'impeto suo, più vivamente quivi	101	attacking with his overwhelming force

dove le resistenze eran più grosse.	102	wherever the resistance was most stubborn.

    Di lui si fecer poi diversi rivi	103	'From him there sprang still other streams

onde l'orto catolico si riga,	104	from which the Catholic garden draws its moisture,

sì che i suoi arbuscelli stan più vivi.	105	so that its saplings grow with greater vigor.

    Se tal fu l'una rota de la biga	106	'If such was one of the wheels of the chariot

in che la Santa Chiesa si difese	107	used by Holy Church in self-defense

e vinse in campo la sua civil briga,	108	to overcome the rebels in the field,

    ben ti dovrebbe assai esser palese	109	'surely the excellence of that other,

l'eccellenza de l'altra, di cui Tomma	110	about whom Thomas spoke so courteously

dinanzi al mio venir fu sì cortese.	111	before I came, must be well known to you.

    Ma l'orbita che fé la parte somma	112	'But the track left by the outer rim

di sua circunferenza, è derelitta,	113	of its circumference is abandoned,

sì ch'è la muffa dov' era la gromma.	114	so that where once was crust, there now is mold.

    La sua famiglia, che si mosse dritta	115	'His family, which started out setting their feet

coi piedi a le sue orme, è tanto volta,	116	upon his footprints, is now turned backward,

che quel dinanzi a quel di retro gitta;	117	setting their toes where once they placed their heels.

    e tosto si vedrà de la ricolta	118	'Soon that harvest of bad tillage

de la mala coltura, quando il loglio	119	shall occur, when the tares complain

si lagnerà che l'arca li sia tolta.	120	that the barn is shut against them.

    Ben dico, chi cercasse a foglio a foglio	121	'I readily admit that, should one search our volume

nostro volume, ancor troveria carta	122	leaf by leaf, one still could find some pages

u' leggerebbe 'I' mi son quel ch'i' soglio';	123	where one might read, "What once I was, I am."

    ma non fia da Casal né d'Acquasparta,	124	'But these will not come from Casale or Acquasparta,

là onde vegnon tali a la scrittura,	125	for those from there come to the Rule

ch'uno la fugge e altro la coarta.	126	either to flee it or constrict it further.

    Io son la vita di Bonaventura	127	'I am the living soul of Bonaventura

da Bagnoregio, che ne' grandi offici	128	from Bagnoregio, who in great office

sempre pospuosi la sinistra cura.	129	ever put last the left-hand care.

    Illuminato e Augustin son quici,	130	'Here are Illuminato and Augustine,

che fuor de' primi scalzi poverelli	131	among the first brothers barefoot in poverty,

che nel capestro a Dio si fero amici.	132	who, with the cord, became God's friends.

    Ugo da San Vittore è qui con elli,	133	'Here with them is Hugh of St. Victor,

e Pietro Mangiadore e Pietro Spano,	134	Peter the Bookworm, and Peter the Spaniard --

lo qual giù luce in dodici libelli;	135	who casts light from his twelve books below,

    Natàn profeta e 'l metropolitano	136	'Nathan the prophet, Chrysostom

Crisostomo e Anselmo e quel Donato	137	the Metropolitan, Anselm, and that Donatus

ch'a la prim' arte degnò porre mano.	138	who, to the first art, deigned to set his hand.

    Rabano è qui, e lucemi dallato	139	'Rabanus is here and, shining at my side,

il calavrese abate Giovacchino	140	abbot Joachim of Calabria,

di spirito profetico dotato.	141	who was endowed with prophetic spirit.

    Ad inveggiar cotanto paladino	142	'To sing the praises of so great a champion

mi mosse l'infiammata cortesia	143	the ardent courtesy and fitting discourse

di fra Tommaso e 'l discreto latino;	144	of Brother Thomas has inspired me

e mosse meco questa compagnia."	145	and did the same to my companions.'

Copyright © 1997-1998 The Trustees of Princeton University and Prof. Robert Hollander.
All Rights Reserved. Use of this site is governed by Terms and Conditions of Use/Legal Notices in connection with the use of this web site.
Thank you for visiting. And for reading the fine print. Bugs? Comments?
























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































commedia	minor works	multimedia	lectures	site info	help	search
