
PHILOLOGY Column Image.	COMMENTARY Column Image.	TOYNBEE Column Image.	DARTMOUTH DANTE PROJECT Column Image.	AUDIO Column Image.	IMAGES Column Image.
Move to the Princeton Dante Project home.	Move to the start of Canto 6
Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.
Move to the following Location: Par, Canto 5, Lines 1:200	Move to the Summary Page.	Move to the table of contents.	Move to the Search Page.	Move to the following Location: Par, Canto 7, Lines 1:200

    "Poscia che Costantin l'aquila volse	1	'Once Constantine reversed the eagle's flight,

contr' al corso del ciel, ch'ella seguio	2	counter to the course of heaven it had followed

dietro a l'antico che Lavina tolse,	3	behind that ancient who took Lavinia to wife,

    cento e cent' anni e più l'uccel di Dio	4	'for two hundred years and more the bird of God

ne lo stremo d'Europa si ritenne,	5	remained at Europe's borders,

vicino a' monti de' quai prima uscìo;	6	near the mountains from which it first came forth.

    e sotto l'ombra de le sacre penne	7	'There it ruled the world beneath the shadow

governò 'l mondo lì di mano in mano,	8	of its sacred wings, passing from hand to hand

e, sì cangiando, in su la mia pervenne.	9	and, changing in this way, at last came into mine.

    Cesare fui e son Iustinïano,	10	'Caesar I was and am Justinian,

che, per voler del primo amor ch'i' sento,	11	who, by will of the Primal Love I feel,

d'entro le leggi trassi il troppo e 'l vano.	12	pruned from the laws what was superfluous and vain.

    E prima ch'io a l'ovra fossi attento,	13	'Before I had set my mind to that hard task

una natura in Cristo esser, non piùe,	14	I believed Christ had but a single nature,

credea, e di tal fede era contento;	15	and not a second, and was content in that belief.

    ma 'l benedetto Agapito, che fue	16	'But the blessèd Agapetus,

sommo pastore, a la fede sincera	17	the most exalted of our shepherds,

mi dirizzò con le parole sue.	18	brought me to the true faith with his words.

    Io li credetti; e ciò che 'n sua fede era,	19	'I believed him. What he held by faith

vegg' io or chiaro sì, come tu vedi	20	I now see just as clearly as you understand

ogne contradizione e falsa e vera.	21	that any contradiction is both false and true.

    Tosto che con la Chiesa mossi i piedi,	22	'As soon as my footsteps moved at the Church's side,

a Dio per grazia piacque di spirarmi	23	it pleased God, in His grace, to grant me inspiration

l'alto lavoro, e tutto 'n lui mi diedi;	24	in the noble task to which I wholly gave myself,

    e al mio Belisar commendai l'armi,	25	'entrusting my weapons to Belisarius,

cui la destra del ciel fu sì congiunta,	26	with whom Heaven's right hand was so conjoined

che segno fu ch'i' dovessi posarmi.	27	it was a sign for me to give them up.

    Or qui a la question prima s'appunta	28	'Here, then, ends my reply to your first question,

la mia risposta; ma sua condizione	29	but its nature still constrains me

mi stringe a seguitare alcuna giunta,	30	to follow up with something further

    perché tu veggi con quanta ragione	31	'so that you may consider if with reason some rebel

si move contr' al sacrosanto segno	32	against that sacred standard, both those opposed

e chi 'l s'appropria e chi a lui s'oppone.	33	and those who take it as their own.

    Vedi quanta virtù l'ha fatto degno	34	'Consider how much valor has made it worthy

di reverenza; e cominciò da l'ora	35	of reverence, beginning with the hour

che Pallante morì per darli regno.	36	when Pallas gave his life to give it sway.

    Tu sai ch'el fece in Alba sua dimora	37	'You know it made its home in Alba

per trecento anni e oltre, infino al fine	38	for three hundred years and more until, at last,

che i tre a' tre pugnar per lui ancora.	39	again for its sake, three made war on three.

    E sai ch'el fé dal mal de le Sabine	40	'And you know what it accomplished under seven kings,

al dolor di Lucrezia in sette regi,	41	from the wrongs done Sabine women to Lucretia's woes,

vincendo intorno le genti vicine.	42	conquering the nearby people all around.

    Sai quel ch'el fé portato da li egregi	43	'You know what it accomplished when it was held aloft

Romani incontro a Brenno, incontro a Pirro,	44	by the noble Romans against Brennus, against Pyrrhus,

incontro a li altri principi e collegi;	45	against the other kingdoms and republics,

    onde Torquato e Quinzio, che dal cirro	46	'so that Torquatus, Quintius -- named

negletto fu nomato, i Deci e ' Fabi	47	for his unkempt locks -- the Decii, the Fabii:

ebber la fama che volontier mirro.	48	all achieved the fame that I am glad to keep.

    Esso atterrò l'orgoglio de li Aràbi	49	'It brought the pride of Arabs low

che di retro ad Anibale passaro	50	when they followed Hannibal along the Alpine crags

l'alpestre rocce, Po, di che tu labi.	51	from which, O river Po, you fall.

    Sott' esso giovanetti trïunfaro	52	'Under it triumphed youthful Scipio and Pompey,

Scipïone e Pompeo; e a quel colle	53	and to that hill beneath which you were born

sotto 'l qual tu nascesti parve amaro.	54	it seemed indeed a bitter sight.

    Poi, presso al tempo che tutto 'l ciel volle	55	'Then, as the time approached when Heaven willed

redur lo mondo a suo modo sereno,	56	to bring the world to its own state of peace,

Cesare per voler di Roma il tolle.	57	Caesar, by the will of Rome, laid hold on it.

    E quel che fé da Varo infino a Reno,	58	'And what it accomplished, from the Var to the Rhine,

Isara vide ed Era e vide Senna	59	the Isère and the Loire and the Seine beheld,

e ogne valle onde Rodano è pieno.	60	as did all the valleys that supply the Rhone.

    Quel che fé poi ch'elli uscì di Ravenna	61	'What it accomplished when it issued from Ravenna

e saltò Rubicon, fu di tal volo,	62	and leapt the Rubicon was such a flight

che nol seguiteria lingua né penna.	63	that neither tongue nor pen could follow it.

    Inver' la Spagna rivolse lo stuolo,	64	'Toward Spain it wheeled in arms,

poi ver' Durazzo, e Farsalia percosse	65	then toward Durazzo, and smote Pharsalia,

sì ch'al Nil caldo si sentì del duolo.	66	thus bringing grief to the tepid waters of the Nile.

    Antandro e Simeonta, onde si mosse,	67	'Antandros and the Simois, where it had set out,

rivide e là dov' Ettore si cuba;	68	it saw again, and the place where Hector lies.

e mal per Tolomeo poscia si scosse.	69	Then it roused itself -- at Ptolemy's expense.

    Da indi scese folgorando a Iuba;	70	'From there, like lightning, it fell on Juba,

onde si volse nel vostro occidente,	71	then turned toward the region to your west,

ove sentia la pompeana tuba.	72	where it heard the sound of Pompey's trumpet.

    Di quel che fé col baiulo seguente,	73	'For what it wrought with the one who bore it next

Bruto con Cassio ne l'inferno latra,	74	Brutus and Cassius bark in Hell,

e Modena e Perugia fu dolente.	75	and both Modena and Perugia were aggrieved.

    Piangene ancor la trista Cleopatra,	76	'Wretched Cleopatra still weeps because of it.

che, fuggendoli innanzi, dal colubro	77	She, fleeing before its advancing front,

la morte prese subitana e atra.	78	took from the asp her quick and baleful death.

    Con costui corse infino al lito rubro;	79	'With him it raced to the shore of the Red Sea.

con costui puose il mondo in tanta pace,	80	With him it brought the world such peace

che fu serrato a Giano il suo delubro.	81	that the doors of Janus's shrine were locked.

    Ma ciò che 'l segno che parlar mi face	82	'But what the standard that promotes my speech

fatto avea prima e poi era fatturo	83	had done before and had yet to do

per lo regno mortal ch'a lui soggiace,	84	in the mortal realm where it holds sway

    diventa in apparenza poco e scuro,	85	'comes to seem both small and dim

se in mano al terzo Cesare si mira	86	if we observe it, with clear eyes and pure affection,

con occhio chiaro e con affetto puro;	87	when it was held in the third Caesar's hand.

    ché la viva giustizia che mi spira,	88	'For the living justice that inspires me

li concedette, in mano a quel ch'i' dico,	89	allowed it, in the hand of him of whom I speak,

gloria di far vendetta a la sua ira.	90	the glory of the vengeance for His wrath.

    Or qui t'ammira in ciò ch'io ti replìco:	91	'Now must you marvel at what I unfold:

poscia con Tito a far vendetta corse	92	Afterwards it raced with Titus, doing vengeance

de la vendetta del peccato antico.	93	upon the vengeance for the ancient sin.

    E quando il dente longobardo morse	94	'Then, beneath its wings,

la Santa Chiesa, sotto le sue ali	95	when Lombard tooth bit Holy Church,

Carlo Magno, vincendo, la soccorse.	96	Charlemagne, in victory, gave her comfort.

    Omai puoi giudicar di quei cotali	97	'Now you may judge such men as I accused before

ch'io accusai di sopra e di lor falli,	98	and consider their offenses,

che son cagion di tutti vostri mali.	99	the very cause of all your ills.

    L'uno al pubblico segno i gigli gialli	100	'One sets against the universal standard

oppone, e l'altro appropria quello a parte,	101	yellow lilies, while the other claims it for a party,

sì ch'è forte a veder chi più si falli.	102	so that it's hard to see which one offends the more.

    Faccian li Ghibellin, faccian lor arte	103	'Let the Ghibellines ply them, ply their tricks

sott' altro segno, ché mal segue quello	104	beneath another standard, for he follows

sempre chi la giustizia e lui diparte;	105	this one poorly who severs it from justice.

    e non l'abbatta esto Carlo novello	106	'And let not this new Charles strive to fell it

coi Guelfi suoi, ma tema de li artigli	107	with his Guelphs, but let him fear its claws,

ch'a più alto leon trasser lo vello.	108	which have ripped the hides from greater lions.

    Molte fïate già pianser li figli	109	'Many a time have children wept

per la colpa del padre, e non si creda	110	for the father's sin, and let him not think

che Dio trasmuti l'armi per suoi gigli!	111	that God will change His ensign for those lilies.

    Questa picciola stella si correda	112	'This little star is ornamented

d'i buoni spirti che son stati attivi	113	with righteous spirits, those whose deeds were done

perché onore e fama li succeda:	114	for the honor and the glory that would follow.

    e quando li disiri poggian quivi,	115	'When such errant desires arise down there,

sì disvïando, pur convien che i raggi	116	then the rays of the one true love

del vero amore in sù poggin men vivi.	117	must rise with less intensity.

    Ma nel commensurar d'i nostri gaggi	118	'But noting how our merit equals our reward

col merto è parte di nostra letizia,	119	is part of our happiness,

perché non li vedem minor né maggi.	120	because we see them being neither less nor more.

    Quindi addolcisce la viva giustizia	121	'So much does living justice sweeten our affection

in noi l'affetto sì, che non si puote	122	we cannot ever then take on

torcer già mai ad alcuna nequizia.	123	the warp of wickedness.

    Diverse voci fanno dolci note;	124	'Differing voices make sweet music.

così diversi scanni in nostra vita	125	Just so our differing ranks in this our life

rendon dolce armonia tra queste rote.	126	create sweet harmony among these wheels.

    E dentro a la presente margarita	127	'Within this very pearl shines

luce la luce di Romeo, di cui	128	the shining light of Romeo,

fu l'ovra grande e bella mal gradita.	129	whose great and noble work was poorly paid.

    Ma i Provenzai che fecer contra lui	130	'But those of Provence who schemed against him

non hanno riso; e però mal cammina	131	have not had the last laugh -- he takes an evil road

qual si fa danno del ben fare altrui.	132	to whom another's good deed seems a wrong.

    Quattro figlie ebbe, e ciascuna reina,	133	'Raymond Berenger had four daughters,

Ramondo Beringhiere, e ciò li fece	134	each of them a queen, and Romeo, a man

Romeo, persona umìle e peregrina.	135	of little standing and a stranger, made that happen.

    E poi il mosser le parole biece	136	'And when malicious tongues moved Raymond

a dimandar ragione a questo giusto,	137	to go over accounts with this just man,

che li assegnò sette e cinque per diece,	138	who had rendered him seven plus five for ten,

    indi partissi povero e vetusto;	139	'Romeo left there, poor in his old age.

e se 'l mondo sapesse il cor ch'elli ebbe	140	And, if the world knew the heart he had within

mendicando sua vita a frusto a frusto,	141	when, crust by crust, he begged his bread,

assai lo loda, e più lo loderebbe."	142	much as it praises him, it would praise him more.'

Copyright © 1997-1998 The Trustees of Princeton University and Prof. Robert Hollander.
All Rights Reserved. Use of this site is governed by Terms and Conditions of Use/Legal Notices in connection with the use of this web site.
Thank you for visiting. And for reading the fine print. Bugs? Comments?
































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































commedia	minor works	multimedia	lectures	site info	help	search
