
PHILOLOGY Column Image.	COMMENTARY Column Image.	TOYNBEE Column Image.	DARTMOUTH DANTE PROJECT Column Image.	AUDIO Column Image.	IMAGES Column Image.
Move to the Princeton Dante Project home.	Move to the start of Canto 9
Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.
Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 8, Lines 1:200	Move to the Summary Page.	Move to the table of contents.	Move to the Search Page.	Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 10, Lines 1:200

    La concubina di Titone antico	1	The concubine of old Tithonus,

già s'imbiancava al balco d'orïente,	2	fresh from her doting lover's arms,

fuor de le braccia del suo dolce amico;	3	was glowing white at the window of the east,

    di gemme la sua fronte era lucente,	4	her forehead glittering with gems

poste in figura del freddo animale	5	set in the shape of that cold-blooded creature

che con la coda percuote la gente;	6	that strikes men with its tail.

    e la notte, de' passi con che sale,	7	Where we were, night had climbed

fatti avea due nel loco ov' eravamo,	8	two steps of her ascent and now the wings

e 'l terzo già chinava in giuso l'ale;	9	of the third were already drooping,

    quand' io, che meco avea di quel d'Adamo,	10	when I, who had with me something of Adam,

vinto dal sonno, in su l'erba inchinai	11	lay down, overcome by sleep, there on the grass

là 've già tutti e cinque sedavamo.	12	where the five of us were seated.

    Ne l'ora che comincia i tristi lai	13	At the hour near the verge of morning,

la rondinella presso a la mattina,	14	when the swallow begins her plaintive song,

forse a memoria de' suo' primi guai,	15	remembering, perhaps, her woes of long ago,

    e che la mente nostra, peregrina	16	and when our mind, more pilgrim

più da la carne e men da' pensier presa,	17	from the flesh and less caught up in thoughts,

a le sue visïon quasi è divina,	18	is more prophetic in its visions,

    in sogno mi parea veder sospesa	19	in a dream I seemed to see an eagle,

un'aguglia nel ciel con penne d'oro,	20	with golden feathers, hovering in the sky,

con l'ali aperte e a calare intesa;	21	his wings spread wide, ready to swoop.

    ed esser mi parea là dove fuoro	22	And to me it seemed I was in the very place

abbandonati i suoi da Ganimede,	23	where Ganymede abandoned his own kind

quando fu ratto al sommo consistoro.	24	when he was carried up to the highest council.

    Fra me pensava: "Forse questa fiede	25	And I pondered: --'Perhaps it is its habit

pur qui per uso, e forse d'altro loco	26	to strike only here, disdaining to pluck

disdegna di portarne suso in piede."	27	from elsewhere any in its talons.'

    Poi mi parea che, poi rotata un poco,	28	Then it seemed to me that after wheeling awhile

terribil come folgor discendesse,	29	it plunged down terrible as lightning,

e me rapisse suso infino al foco.	30	and carried me straight to the sphere of fire.

    Ivi parea che ella e io ardesse;	31	There it seemed that it and I were both aflame,

e sì lo 'ncendio imaginato cosse,	32	and the imagined burning was so hot

che convenne che 'l sonno si rompesse.	33	my sleep was broken and gave way.

    Non altrimenti Achille si riscosse,	34	Not otherwise Achilles started up,

li occhi svegliati rivolgendo in giro	35	moving his startled eyes in a wide circle,

e non sappiendo là dove si fosse,	36	not knowing where he was

    quando la madre da Chirón a Schiro	37	that time his mother carried him,

trafuggò lui dormendo in le sue braccia,	38	sleeping in her arms, from Chiron to Scyros,

là onde poi li Greci il dipartiro;	39	where later the Greeks would take him away--

    che mi scoss' io, sì come da la faccia	40	than I awoke, the sleep gone from my eyes,

mi fuggì 'l sonno, e diventa' ismorto,	41	and then went pale,

come fa l'uom che, spaventato, agghiaccia.	42	like a man frozen in his terror.

    Dallato m'era solo il mio conforto,	43	At my side there was no one but my comfort,

e 'l sole er' alto già più che due ore,	44	the sun more than two hours high.

e 'l viso m'era a la marina torto.	45	My face was turned toward the sea.

    "Non aver tema," disse il mio segnore;	46	'Do not be frightened,' said my lord,

"fatti sicur, ché noi semo a buon punto;	47	'have confidence, for all is well with us.

non stringer, ma rallarga ogne vigore.	48	Do not hold back, but rally all your strength.

    Tu se' omai al purgatorio giunto:	49	'Now you have come to Purgatory:

vedi là il balzo che 'l chiude dintorno;	50	there you see the rock wall that encloses it

vedi l'entrata là 've par digiunto.	51	and, where that seems breached, the entrance.

    Dianzi, ne l'alba che procede al giorno,	52	'A short time ago, in the early light of dawn,

quando l'anima tua dentro dormia,	53	when your soul was asleep within you,

sovra li fiori ond' è là giù addorno	54	on the flowers that adorn the place below

    venne una donna, e disse: 'I' son Lucia;	55	'there came a lady who said: "I am Lucy.

lasciatemi pigliar costui che dorme;	56	Let me gather up this sleeping man

sì l'agevolerò per la sua via.'	57	so I may speed him on his way."

    Sordel rimase e l'altre genti forme;	58	'Sordello stayed, as did the other noble souls,

ella ti tolse, e come 'l dì fu chiaro,	59	and she took you and, as soon as it was day,

sen venne suso; e io per le sue orme.	60	went up, and I then followed in her steps.

    Qui ti posò, ma pria mi dimostraro	61	'Here she set you down, but first her lovely eyes

li occhi suoi belli quella intrata aperta;	62	showed me that entrance, standing open.

poi ella e 'l sonno ad una se n'andaro."	63	Then she and sleep, as one, departed.'

    A guisa d'uom che 'n dubbio si raccerta	64	Like a man who comes to see the truth

e che muta in conforto sua paura,	65	when he has been in doubt and now is reassured,

poi che la verità li è discoperta,	66	confidence replacing what in him was fear,

    mi cambia' io; e come sanza cura	67	so was I changed. When my leader saw

vide me 'l duca mio, su per lo balzo	68	that I was free of care, he started up the path,

si mosse, e io di rietro inver' l'altura.	69	and I behind him, heading for the height.

    Lettor, tu vedi ben com' io innalzo	70	Reader, you surely understand that I am raising

la mia matera, e però con più arte	71	the level of my subject here. Do not wonder,

non ti maravigliar s'io la rincalzo.	72	therefore, if I sustain it with more artifice.

    Noi ci appressammo, ed eravamo in parte	73	We drew closer until we reached a place

che là dove pareami prima rotto,	74	where what at first had seemed a gap,

pur come un fesso che muro diparte,	75	a breach that rends a wall,

    vidi una porta, e tre gradi di sotto	76	I now saw was a gate, with three steps leading

per gire ad essa, di color diversi,	77	up to it, each one of a different color.

e un portier ch'ancor non facea motto.	78	The keeper of that gate as yet said not a word.

    E come l'occhio più e più v'apersi,	79	And, when my eyes could make him out more clearly,

vidil seder sovra 'l grado sovrano,	80	I saw that he was seated above the topmost step,

tal ne la faccia ch'io non lo soffersi;	81	his face so bright I could not bear to look.

    e una spada nuda avëa in mano,	82	In his hand he held a naked sword,

che reflettëa i raggi sì ver' noi,	83	which so reflected his bright rays

ch'io dirizzava spesso il viso in vano.	84	I often had to turn my eager eyes away.

    "Dite costinci: che volete voi?"	85	'Say it from there, what do you want,'

cominciò elli a dire, "ov' è la scorta?	86	he began, 'and where is your escort?

Guardate che 'l venir sù non vi nòi."	87	Beware lest your arrival cause you grief.'

    "Donna del ciel, di queste cose accorta,"	88	'A lady from Heaven, who knows about such things,'

rispuose 'l mio maestro a lui, "pur dianzi	89	my master replied, 'said to us just now,

ne disse: 'Andate là: quivi è la porta.'"	90	"Go that way, that way lies the gate."'

    "Ed ella i passi vostri in bene avanzi,"	91	'And may she speed your steps to good,'

ricominciò il cortese portinaio:	92	continued the courteous keeper of the gate.

"Venite dunque a' nostri gradi innanzi."	93	'Come forward, then, to these our stairs.'

    Là ne venimmo; e lo scaglion primaio	94	At that we moved ahead. The first step

bianco marmo era sì pulito e terso,	95	was of clear white marble, so polished

ch'io mi specchiai in esso qual io paio.	96	that my image was reflected in true likeness.

    Era il secondo tinto più che perso,	97	The second was darker than the deepest purple,

d'una petrina ruvida e arsiccia,	98	of unhewn stone, looking as if it had been burned,

crepata per lo lungo e per traverso.	99	cracked through its length and breadth.

    Lo terzo, che di sopra s'ammassiccia,	100	The third, resting its heavy mass above,

porfido mi parea, sì fiammeggiante	101	seemed to me porphyry, as flaming red

come sangue che fuor di vena spiccia.	102	as blood that spurts out from a vein.

    Sovra questo tenëa ambo le piante	103	On this, seated on the threshold,

l'angel di Dio sedendo in su la soglia	104	which seemed to be of adamant,

che mi sembiava pietra di diamante.	105	the angel of God rested both his feet.

    Per li tre gradi sù di buona voglia	106	Up the three steps my leader drew me

mi trasse il duca mio, dicendo: "Chiedi	107	and I was glad for that. Then he said:

umilemente che 'l serrame scioglia."	108	'Humbly petition him to slide the bolt.'

    Divoto mi gittai a' santi piedi;	109	Devoutly I cast myself down at his holy feet.

misericordia chiesi e ch'el m'aprisse,	110	I begged him for mercy and to let me enter,

ma tre volte nel petto pria mi diedi.	111	but first, three times, I smote my breast.

    Sette P ne la fronte mi descrisse	112	With the point of his sword he traced seven P's

col punton de la spada, e "Fa che lavi,	113	upon my forehead, then said: 'Once you are inside,

quando se' dentro, queste piaghe" disse.	114	see that you wash away these wounds.'

    Cenere, o terra che secca si cavi,	115	Ashes or earth, when it is dug up dry,

d'un color fora col suo vestimento;	116	would be the very color of his vestments.

e di sotto da quel trasse due chiavi.	117	Out from under them he drew two keys,

    L'una era d'oro e l'altra era d'argento;	118	one of gold, the other one of silver.

pria con la bianca e poscia con la gialla	119	He touched the door, first with the white,

fece a la porta sì, ch'i' fu' contento.	120	then the yellow, and thus my wish was satisfied.

    "Quandunque l'una d'este chiavi falla,	121	'Any time one of these keys should fail

che non si volga dritta per la toppa,"	122	so that it does not turn inside the lock,'

diss' elli a noi, "non s'apre questa calla.	123	he said to us, 'this portal does not open.

    Più cara è l'una; ma l'altra vuol troppa	124	'One is more precious, but the other one requires

d'arte e d'ingegno avanti che diserri,	125	much skill and understanding before it will unlock,

perch' ella è quella che 'l nodo digroppa.	126	for it is this one that unties the knot.

    Da Pier le tegno; e dissemi ch'i' erri	127	'From Peter do I hold them, and his instruction was

anzi ad aprir ch'a tenerla serrata,	128	to err in opening rather than in keeping locked,

pur che la gente a' piedi mi s'atterri."	129	if but the soul fall prostrate at my feet.'

    Poi pinse l'uscio a la porta sacrata,	130	Then he pushed one door of the sacred portal open,

dicendo: "Intrate; ma facciovi accorti	131	saying: 'Enter, but I warn you

che di fuor torna chi 'n dietro si guata."	132	he who looks back must then return outside.'

    E quando fuor ne' cardini distorti	133	And when the hinges of that sacred door,

li spigoli di quella regge sacra,	134	which are of heavy and resounding metal,

che di metallo son sonanti e forti,	135	were turning on their linchpins,

    non rugghiò sì né si mostrò sì acra	136	the Tarpeian rock roared not so loud

Tarpëa, come tolto le fu il buono	137	nor proved so strident when good Metellus

Metello, per che poi rimase macra.	138	was drawn away and it was then left bare.

    Io mi rivolsi attento al primo tuono,	139	I turned, intent on a new sound,

e "Te Deum laudamus" mi parea	140	and thought I heard 'Te Deum laudamus'

udire in voce mista al dolce suono.	141	in voices mingled with sweet counterpoint,

    Tale imagine a punto mi rendea	142	giving me the same impression

ciò ch'io udiva, qual prender si suole	143	one has when listening to singers

quando a cantar con organi si stea;	144	accompanied by an organ and the words

ch'or sì or no s'intendon le parole.	145	are sometimes clear and sometimes lost.

Copyright © 1997-1998 The Trustees of Princeton University and Prof. Robert Hollander.
All Rights Reserved. Use of this site is governed by Terms and Conditions of Use/Legal Notices in connection with the use of this web site.
Thank you for visiting. And for reading the fine print. Bugs? Comments?































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































commedia	minor works	multimedia	lectures	site info	help	search
