
PHILOLOGY Column Image.	COMMENTARY Column Image.	TOYNBEE Column Image.	DARTMOUTH DANTE PROJECT Column Image.	AUDIO Column Image.	IMAGES Column Image.
Move to the Princeton Dante Project home.	Move to the start of Canto 10
Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.
Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 9, Lines 1:200	Move to the Summary Page.	Move to the table of contents.	Move to the Search Page.	Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 11, Lines 1:200

    Poi fummo dentro al soglio de la porta	1	Once we had crossed the threshold of the gate

che 'l mal amor de l'anime disusa,	2	not used by souls whose twisted love

perché fa parer dritta la via torta,	3	tries to make the crooked way seem straight,

    sonando la senti' esser richiusa;	4	I knew that it had shut by its resounding.

e s'io avesse li occhi vòlti ad essa,	5	And had I turned my eyes to look,

qual fora stata al fallo degna scusa?	6	how could I have excused my fault?

    Noi salavam per una pietra fessa,	7	We were climbing through a crevice in the rock,

che si moveva e d'una e d'altra parte,	8	which first bent one way, then another,

sì come l'onda che fugge e s'appressa.	9	like a wave that ebbs and then comes rushing back,

    "Qui si conviene usare un poco d'arte,"	10	when my leader said: 'Here we must use skill

cominciò 'l duca mio, "in accostarsi	11	in keeping close to one side or the other,

or quinci, or quindi al lato che si parte."	12	hewing to the side where the rock gives way.'

    E questo fece i nostri passi scarsi,	13	This so hindered our slow steps

tanto che pria lo scemo de la luna	14	the waning moon had gained its bed

rigiunse al letto suo per ricorcarsi,	15	and sunken to its rest

    che noi fossimo fuor di quella cruna;	16	before we issued from that needle's eye.

ma quando fummo liberi e aperti	17	But free above, out in the open

sù dove il monte in dietro si rauna,	18	where the cliff draws back to leave a space--

    ïo stancato e amendue incerti	19	I weary and both of us uncertain of our path--

di nostra via, restammo in su un piano	20	we stopped at a flat and open spot

solingo più che strade per diserti.	21	more solitary than a desert track.

    Da la sua sponda, ove confina il vano,	22	From its edge, which borders on the void,

al piè de l'alta ripa che pur sale,	23	to the foot of the lofty bank in its sheer rise,

misurrebbe in tre volte un corpo umano;	24	would measure thrice the body of a man,

    e quanto l'occhio mio potea trar d'ale,	25	and as far as my eye could wing its flight,

or dal sinistro e or dal destro fianco,	26	now toward the left, now toward the other side,

questa cornice mi parea cotale.	27	the terrace stretched before me.

    Là sù non eran mossi i piè nostri anco,	28	Our feet had not yet stepped on it

quand' io conobbi quella ripa intorno	29	when I perceived that the encircling bank,

che dritto di salita aveva manco,	30	steep and impossible to climb,

    esser di marmo candido e addorno	31	was of white marble carved with so much art

d'intagli sì, che non pur Policleto,	32	that Polycletus and nature herself

ma la natura lì avrebbe scorno.	33	would there be put to shame.

    L'angel che venne in terra col decreto	34	The angel who came to earth with the decree of peace

de la molt' anni lagrimata pace,	35	that had been wept and yearned for all those years,

ch'aperse il ciel del suo lungo divieto,	36	which opened Heaven, ending God's long ban,

    dinanzi a noi pareva sì verace	37	appeared before us so vividly engraved

quivi intagliato in un atto soave,	38	in gracious attitude

che non sembiava imagine che tace.	39	it did not seem an image, carved and silent.

    Giurato si saria ch'el dicesse "Ave!";	40	One would have sworn he was saying 'Ave,'

perché iv' era imaginata quella	41	for she as well was pictured there

ch'ad aprir l'alto amor volse la chiave;	42	who turned the key to love on high.

    e avea in atto impressa esta favella	43	And in her attitude imprinted were

"Ecce ancilla Deï," propriamente	44	the words: 'Ecce ancilla Dei'

come figura in cera si suggella.	45	as clearly as a figure stamped in wax.

    "Non tener pur ad un loco la mente,"	46	'Do not fix your mind on one part only,'

disse 'l dolce maestro, che m'avea	47	said the kind master, who had me

da quella parte onde 'l cuore ha la gente.	48	on that side of him where we have our hearts.

    Per ch'i' mi mossi col viso, e vedea	49	At that I turned my face

di retro da Maria, da quella costa	50	and, looking beyond Mary, saw,

onde m'era colui che mi movea,	51	on the same side as he that prompted me,

    un'altra storia ne la roccia imposta;	52	another story set into the rock.

per ch'io varcai Virgilio, e fe'mi presso,	53	I went past Virgil and drew near

acciò che fosse a li occhi miei disposta.	54	so that my eyes might better take it in.

    Era intagliato lì nel marmo stesso	55	There, carved into the marble, were the cart

lo carro e ' buoi, traendo l'arca santa,	56	and oxen, drawing the sacred ark that makes men fear

per che si teme officio non commesso.	57	to assume an office not entrusted to them.

    Dinanzi parea gente; e tutta quanta,	58	The foreground, peopled by figures grouped

partita in sette cori, a' due mie' sensi	59	in seven choirs, made one sense argue 'No'

faceva dir l'un "No," l'altro "Sì, canta."	60	and the other: 'Yes, they sing.'

    Similemente al fummo de li 'ncensi	61	In the same way, the smoke of incense

che v'era imaginato, li occhi e 'l naso	62	sculpted there put eyes and nose

e al sì e al no discordi fensi.	63	in discord, caught between yes and no.

    Lì precedeva al benedetto vaso,	64	There the humble psalmist leaped in dance

trescando alzato, l'umile salmista,	65	before the blessèd vessel with his robe hitched up--

e più e men che re era in quel caso.	66	and was at once both more and less than king.

    Di contra, effigïata ad una vista	67	Opposite, a figure at the window

d'un gran palazzo, Micòl ammirava	68	of a splendid palace, Michal looked on,

sì come donna dispettosa e trista.	69	like a woman vexed and scornful.

    I' mossi i piè del loco dov' io stava,	70	I moved some steps from where I stood

per avvisar da presso un'altra istoria,	71	to look more closely at another story

che di dietro a Micòl mi biancheggiava.	72	that I saw gleaming white beyond Michal.

    Quiv' era storïata l'alta gloria	73	Depicted there was the glorious act

del roman principato, il cui valore	74	of the Roman prince whose worth

mosse Gregorio a la sua gran vittoria;	75	urged Gregory on to his great victory--

    i' dico di Traiano imperadore;	76	I speak of the emperor Trajan,

e una vedovella li era al freno,	77	with the poor widow at his bridle, weeping,

di lagrime atteggiata e di dolore.	78	in a pose of grief--

    Intorno a lui parea calcato e pieno	79	the soil all trampled by the thronging knights.

di cavalieri, e l'aguglie ne l'oro	80	Above, the eagles fixed in gold

sovr' essi in vista al vento si movieno.	81	seemed to flutter in the wind.

    La miserella intra tutti costoro	82	In their midst, one could almost hear the plea

pareva dir: "Segnor, fammi vendetta	83	of that unhappy creature: 'My lord, avenge

di mio figliuol ch'è morto, ond' io m'accoro";	84	my murdered son for me. It is for him I grieve,'

    ed elli a lei rispondere: "Or aspetta	85	and his answer: 'Wait till I return,'

tanto ch'i' torni"; e quella: "Segnor mio,"	86	and she: 'My lord,' like one whose grief is urgent,

come persona in cui dolor s'affretta,	87	'and if you don't return?' and his answer:

    "se tu non torni?"; ed ei: "Chi fia dov' io,	88	'He who will take my place will do it,'

la ti farà"; ed ella: "L'altrui bene	89	and she: 'What use is another's goodness to you

a te che fia, se 'l tuo metti in oblio?";	90	if you are unmindful of your own?'

    ond' elli: "Or ti conforta; ch'ei convene	91	And he then: 'Now take comfort, for I must discharge

ch'i' solva il mio dovere anzi ch'i' mova:	92	my debt to you before I go to war.

giustizia vuole e pietà mi ritene."	93	Justice wills it and compassion bids me stay.'

    Colui che mai non vide cosa nova	94	He in whose sight nothing can be new

produsse esto visibile parlare,	95	wrought this speech made visible,

novello a noi perché qui non si trova.	96	new to us because it is not found on earth.

    Mentr' io mi dilettava di guardare	97	While I took pleasure in the sight

l'imagini di tante umilitadi,	98	of images of such humility,

e per lo fabbro loro a veder care,	99	the lovelier to look at for their maker's sake,

    "Ecco di qua, ma fanno i passi radi,"	100	'Here they come, though with slow steps,'

mormorava il poeta, "molte genti:	101	the poet murmured.

questi ne 'nvïeranno a li alti gradi."	102	'They will direct us to the next ascent.'

    Li occhi miei, ch'a mirare eran contenti	103	My eyes, glad to gaze upon the marble,

per veder novitadi ond' e' son vaghi,	104	quickly turned in his direction,

volgendosi ver' lui non furon lenti.	105	eager at the promise of new things.

    Non vo' però, lettor, che tu ti smaghi	106	Reader, I would not have you fall away

di buon proponimento per udire	107	from good intentions when you hear

come Dio vuol che 'l debito si paghi.	108	the way God wills the debt be paid.

    Non attender la forma del martìre:	109	Do not dwell upon the nature of the suffering.

pensa la succession; pensa ch'al peggio	110	Think what is to follow, think that at the worst

oltre la gran sentenza non può ire.	111	it cannot last beyond the final Judgment.

    Io cominciai: "Maestro, quel ch'io veggio	112	'Master,' I began, 'those that I see

muovere a noi, non mi sembian persone,	113	moving toward us do not look like people--

e non so che, sì nel veder vaneggio."	114	whatever they may be, I cannot make them out.'

    Ed elli a me: "La grave condizione	115	And he answered: 'The grave nature

di lor tormento a terra li rannicchia,	116	of their torment contorts their bodies to a crouch,

sì che ' miei occhi pria n'ebber tencione.	117	so that at first my eyes were undecided.

    Ma guarda fiso là, e disviticchia	118	'But look closer, disentangle

col viso quel che vien sotto a quei sassi:	119	the figures bent beneath them from the stones.

già scorger puoi come ciascun si picchia."	120	Then you can see how each one beats his breast.'

    O superbi cristian, miseri lassi,	121	O vainglorious Christians, miserable wretches!

che, de la vista de la mente infermi,	122	Sick in the visions engendered in your minds,

fidanza avete ne' retrosi passi,	123	you put your trust in backward steps.

    non v'accorgete voi che noi siam vermi	124	Do you not see that we are born as worms,

nati a formar l'angelica farfalla,	125	though able to transform into angelic butterflies

che vola a la giustizia sanza schermi?	126	that unimpeded soar to justice?

    Di che l'animo vostro in alto galla,	127	What makes your mind rear up so high?

poi siete quasi antomata in difetto,	128	You are, as it were, defective creatures,

sì come vermo in cui formazion falla?	129	like the unformed worm, shaped from the mud.

    Come per sostentar solaio o tetto,	130	To hold up roof or ceiling, as a corbel does,

per mensola talvolta una figura	131	we sometimes see a crouching figure,

si vede giugner le ginocchia al petto,	132	its knees pushed up against its chest,

    la qual fa del non ver vera rancura	133	and that unreal depiction may arouse

nascere 'n chi la vede; così fatti	134	in him who sees it real distress,

vid' io color, quando puosi ben cura.	135	such were these shapes when I could make them out.

    Vero è che più e meno eran contratti	136	They were indeed hunched over more or less,

secondo ch'avien più e meno a dosso;	137	depending on the burdens on their backs,

e qual più pazïenza avea ne li atti,	138	and even he that showed the greatest patience,

piangendo parea dicer: "Più non posso."	139	weeping, seemed to say: 'I can no more.'

Copyright © 1997-1998 The Trustees of Princeton University and Prof. Robert Hollander.
All Rights Reserved. Use of this site is governed by Terms and Conditions of Use/Legal Notices in connection with the use of this web site.
Thank you for visiting. And for reading the fine print. Bugs? Comments?





























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































commedia	minor works	multimedia	lectures	site info	help	search
