
PHILOLOGY Column Image.	COMMENTARY Column Image.	TOYNBEE Column Image.	DARTMOUTH DANTE PROJECT Column Image.	AUDIO Column Image.	IMAGES Column Image.
Move to the Princeton Dante Project home.	Move to the start of Canto 22
Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.
Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 21, Lines 1:200	Move to the Summary Page.	Move to the table of contents.	Move to the Search Page.	Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 23, Lines 1:200

    Già era l'angel dietro a noi rimaso,	1	The angel who had shown the way

l'angel che n'avea vòlti al sesto giro,	2	to the sixth circling now was left behind,

avendomi dal viso un colpo raso;	3	having erased another swordstroke from my brow

    e quei c'hanno a giustizia lor disiro	4	as he declared that those who long for righteousness

detto n'avea beati, e le sue voci	5	are blessed, ending on sitiunt

con 'sitiunt,' sanz'altro, ciò forniro.	6	without the other words he might have said.

    E io più lieve che per l'altre foci	7	And now I could move on, lighter

m'andava, sì che sanz'alcun labore	8	than at the other entrances, so that I followed

seguiva in sù li spiriti veloci;	9	the swifter spirits up with ease,

    quando Virgilio incominciò: "Amore,	10	when Virgil began: 'A love that is kindled by virtue

acceso di virtù, sempre altro accese,	11	has always ignited another, as long as its flame

pur che la fiamma sua paresse fore;	12	was shining where it could be seen.

    onde da l'ora che tra noi discese	13	'From the hour, therefore, when Juvenal descended

nel limbo de lo 'nferno Giovenale,	14	into the Limbo of Hell, among us,

che la tua affezion mi fé palese,	15	and made your affection known to me,

    mia benvoglienza inverso te fu quale	16	'my good will toward you was as great

più strinse mai di non vista persona,	17	as anyone has ever felt for someone never seen,

sì ch'or mi parran corte queste scale.	18	so that to me these stairs will now seem short.

    Ma dimmi, e come amico mi perdona	19	'But tell me--and as a friend forgive me

se troppo sicurtà m'allarga il freno,	20	if with too much assurance I relax the reins,

e come amico omai meco ragiona:	21	and as a friend speak with me now--

    come poté trovar dentro al tuo seno	22	'how could avarice find room

loco avarizia, tra cotanto senno	23	amidst such wisdom in your breast,

di quanto per tua cura fosti pieno?"	24	the wisdom that you nourished with such care.'

    Queste parole Stazio mover fenno	25	These words made Statius smile a little

un poco a riso pria; poscia rispuose:	26	before he answered: 'Every word of yours

"Ogne tuo dir d'amor m'è caro cenno.	27	is to me a welcome token of your love.

    Veramente più volte appaion cose	28	'But, in truth, things often are misleading

che danno a dubitar falsa matera	29	when their true causes remain hidden,

per le vere ragion che son nascose.	30	thus leading us to false conclusions.

    La tua dimanda tuo creder m'avvera	31	'Your question shows me you believe,

esser ch'i' fossi avaro in l'altra vita,	32	perhaps because of the terrace I was on,

forse per quella cerchia dov' io era.	33	that I was avaricious in the other life.

    Or sappi ch'avarizia fu partita	34	'Know then that avarice was much too far

troppo da me, e questa dismisura	35	removed from me and that this lack of measure

migliaia di lunari hanno punita.	36	lunar months in thousands now have punished.

    E se non fosse ch'io drizzai mia cura,	37	'And had I not reformed my inclination

quand'io intesi là dove tu chiame,	38	when I came to understand the lines in which,

crucciato quasi a l'umana natura:	39	as if enraged at human nature, you cried out:

    'Per che non reggi tu, o sacra fame	40	'"To what end, O cursèd hunger for gold,

de l'oro, l'appetito de' mortali?',	41	do you not govern the appetite of mortals?"

voltando sentirei le giostre grame.	42	I would know the rolling weights and dismal jousts.

    Allor m'accorsi che troppo aprir l'ali	43	'Then I learned that we can spread

potean le mani a spendere, e pente'mi	44	our wings too wide with spending hands,

così di quel come de li altri mali.	45	and I repented that and other sins.

    Quanti risurgeran coi crini scemi	46	'How many more will have to rise again, hair shorn

per ignoranza, che di questa pecca	47	through ignorance, which takes away repentance

toglie 'l penter vivendo e ne li stremi!	48	of this sin in life and in the hour of death!

    E sappie che la colpa che rimbecca	49	'Note, also, that the fault that moves

per dritta opposizione alcun peccato,	50	directly opposite to a sin

con esso insieme qui suo verde secca;	51	is here grouped with it and is withered of its green.

    però, s'io son tra quella gente stato	52	'Therefore, if I, to purge my sins, have been

che piange l'avarizia, per purgarmi,	53	among those shades who weep for avarice,

per lo contrario suo m'è incontrato."	54	this has befallen me for the opposing fault.'

    "Or quando tu cantasti le crude armi	55	'But, when you sang the cruel warfare

de la doppia trestizia di Giocasta,"	56	between the twofold sorrows of Jocasta,'

disse 'l cantor de' buccolici carmi,	57	said the singer of the Eclogues,

    "per quello che Clïò teco lì tasta,	58	'it does not seem, from what you wrote with Clio's help,

non par che ti facesse ancor fedele	59	that you had found as yet the faith,

la fede, sanza qual ben far non basta.	60	that faith without which good works fail.

    Se così è, qual sole o quai candele	61	'If that is so, what sun, what candles

ti stenebraron sì, che tu drizzasti	62	dispelled your darkness so that afterwards

poscia di retro al pescator le vele?"	63	you hoisted sail, following the fisherman?'

    Ed elli a lui: "Tu prima m'invïasti	64	And the other answered him: 'It was you who first

verso Parnaso a ber ne le sue grotte,	65	set me toward Parnassus to drink in its grottoes,

e prima appresso Dio m'alluminasti.	66	and you who first lit my way toward God.

    Facesti come quei che va di notte,	67	'You were as one who goes by night, carrying

che porta il lume dietro e sé non giova,	68	the light behind him--it is no help to him,

ma dopo sé fa le persone dotte,	69	but instructs all those who follow--

    quando dicesti: 'Secol si rinova;	70	'when you said: "The centuries turn new again.

torna giustizia e primo tempo umano,	71	Justice returns with the first age of man,

e progenïe scende da ciel nova.'	72	new progeny descends from Heaven."

    Per te poeta fui, per te cristiano:	73	'Through you I was a poet, through you a Christian.

ma perché veggi mei ciò ch'io disegno,	74	But, that you may see better what I outline,

a colorare stenderò la mano.	75	I will set my hand to fill the colors in.

    Già era 'l mondo tutto quanto pregno	76	'Already all the world was pregnant

de la vera credenza, seminata	77	with the true faith, inseminated

per li messaggi de l'etterno regno;	78	by the messengers of the eternal kingdom,

    e la parola tua sopra toccata	79	'and the words of yours I have just recited

si consonava a' nuovi predicanti;	80	did so accord with the new preachers

ond'io a visitarli presi usata.	81	that I began to visit them.

    Vennermi poi parendo tanto santi,	82	'More and more they seemed to me so holy

che, quando Domizian li perseguette,	83	that when Domitian started with his persecutions

sanza mio lagrimar non fur lor pianti;	84	their weeping did not lack my tears.

    e mentre che di là per me si stette,	85	'While I remained on earth,

io li sovvenni, e i lor dritti costumi	86	I gave them comfort. Their upright ways

fer dispregiare a me tutte altre sette.	87	made me despise all other sects.

    E pria ch'io conducessi i Greci a' fiumi	88	'I was baptized before, in my verses,

di Tebe poetando, ebb' io battesmo;	89	I had led the Greeks to the rivers of Thebes,

ma per paura chiuso cristian fu'mi,	90	but, from fear, I stayed a secret Christian,

    lungamente mostrando paganesmo;	91	'long pretending I was still a pagan.

e questa tepidezza il quarto cerchio	92	More than four centuries, because I was lukewarm,

cerchiar mi fé più che 'l quarto centesmo.	93	did I circle the fourth terrace.

    Tu dunque, che levato hai il coperchio	94	'You, then, who have raised the veil

che m'ascondeva quanto bene io dico,	95	that hid from me the great good I describe,

mentre che del salire avem soverchio,	96	tell me, while there is time in this ascent,

    dimmi dov' è Terrenzio nostro antico,	97	'where is our ancient Terence, where Cecilius,

Cecilio e Plauto e Varro, se lo sai:	98	Plautus, Varius, if you know.

dimmi se son dannati, e in qual vico."	99	Tell me if they are damned and in what place.'

    "Costoro e Persio e io e altri assai,"	100	'Those, Persius, and I, and many more,'

rispuose il duca mio, "siam con quel Greco	101	replied my leader, 'are with that Greek

che le Muse lattar più ch'altri mai,	102	the Muses suckled more than any other,

    nel primo cinghio del carcere cieco;	103	'in the first circle of the dark prison.

spesse fïate ragioniam del monte	104	We often talk about that mountain

che sempre ha le nutrice nostre seco.	105	where those who nursed us ever dwell.

    Euripide v'è nosco e Antifonte,	106	'Euripides is with us there and Antiphon,

Simonide, Agatone e altri piùe	107	Simonides and Agathon and many other Greeks

Greci che già di lauro ornar la fronte.	108	whose brows were once adorned with laurel.

    Quivi si veggion de le genti tue	109	'Among those from your works who may be seen

Antigone, Deïfile e Argia,	110	are Antigone, Deïphyle, Argia,

e Ismene sì trista come fue.	111	and Ismene, still sad as once she was.

    Védeisi quella che mostrò Langia;	112	'She that revealed Langìa also may be seen,

èvvi la figlia di Tiresia, e Teti,	113	as well as the daughter of Tiresias,

e con le suore sue Deïdamia."	114	and Thetis, and Deïdamìa with her sisters.'

    Tacevansi ambedue già li poeti,	115	Both the poets now were silent,

di novo attenti a riguardar dintorno,	116	again intent on looking all around them,

liberi da saliri e da pareti;	117	freed from the constraint of stairs and walls.

    e già le quattro ancelle eran del giorno	118	Already four handmaids of the day were left behind

rimase a dietro, e la quinta era al temo,	119	and the fifth was at the chariot-shaft,

drizzando pur in sù l'ardente corno,	120	guiding its gleaming tip still higher,

    quando il mio duca: "Io credo ch'a lo stremo	121	when my leader said: 'It might be better if we turned

le destre spalle volger ne convegna,	122	our right side's shoulders to the outer edge,

girando il monte come far solemo."	123	circling the mountain as we are accustomed.'

    Così l'usanza fu lì nostra insegna,	124	Thus habit was our teacher there,

e prendemmo la via con men sospetto	125	and we took our way with less uncertainty

per l'assentir di quell' anima degna.	126	because that other worthy soul encouraged us.

    Elli givan dinanzi, e io soletto	127	They went along in front and I, alone,

di retro, e ascoltava i lor sermoni,	128	came on behind, listening to their discourse,

ch'a poetar mi davano intelletto.	129	which gave me understanding of the art of verse.

    Ma tosto ruppe le dolci ragioni	130	But soon their pleasant talk was interrupted

un alber che trovammo in mezza strada,	131	by a tree found in the middle of the path,

con pomi a odorar soavi e buoni;	132	with fruits that smelled both savory and good,

    e come abete in alto si digrada	133	and, as a fir tree narrows as it branches upward,

di ramo in ramo, così quello in giuso,	134	this one tapered down from branch to branch,

cred' io, perché persona sù non vada.	135	perhaps so that no one can climb it.

    Dal lato onde 'l cammin nostro era chiuso,	136	On that side, where our way was blocked,

cadea de l'alta roccia un liquor chiaro	137	from the high rock fell pellucid water,

e si spandeva per le foglie suso.	138	which was dispersed among the upper leaves.

    Li due poeti a l'alber s'appressaro;	139	As the two poets neared the tree

e una voce per entro le fronde	140	a voice from among the boughs called out:

gridò: "Di questo cibo avrete caro."	141	'This is a food that you shall lack.'

    Poi disse: "Più pensava Maria onde	142	And then it said: 'Mary gave more thought

fosser le nozze orrevoli e intere,	143	that the marriage-feast be decorous and complete

ch'a la sua bocca, ch'or per voi risponde.	144	than for the mouth with which she pleads for you.

    E le Romane antiche, per lor bere,	145	'The Roman matrons of antiquity

contente furon d'acqua; e Danïello	146	were glad to have but water as their drink,

dispregiò cibo e acquistò savere.	147	and Daniel scorned banquets and acquired wisdom.

    Lo secol primo, quant' oro fu bello,	148	'The first age was as beautiful as gold.

fé savorose con fame le ghiande,	149	Its acorns were made savory by hunger

e nettare con sete ogne ruscello.	150	and thirst made nectar flow in every brook.

    Mele e locuste furon le vivande	151	'Honey and locusts were the food

che nodriro il Batista nel diserto;	152	that nourished John the Baptist in the desert,

per ch'elli è glorïoso e tanto grande	153	for which he is glorious and as great

quanto per lo Vangelio v'è aperto."	154	as in the Gospel is revealed to you.'

Copyright © 1997-1998 The Trustees of Princeton University and Prof. Robert Hollander.
All Rights Reserved. Use of this site is governed by Terms and Conditions of Use/Legal Notices in connection with the use of this web site.
Thank you for visiting. And for reading the fine print. Bugs? Comments?










































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































commedia	minor works	multimedia	lectures	site info	help	search
