
PHILOLOGY Column Image.	COMMENTARY Column Image.	TOYNBEE Column Image.	DARTMOUTH DANTE PROJECT Column Image.	AUDIO Column Image.	IMAGES Column Image.
Move to the Princeton Dante Project home.	Move to the start of Canto 15
Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.
Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 14, Lines 1:200	Move to the Summary Page.	Move to the table of contents.	Move to the Search Page.	Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 16, Lines 1:200

    Quanto tra l'ultimar de l'ora terza	1	As much as between the end of the third hour

e 'l principio del dì par de la spera	2	and the first of day is seen of the sphere

che sempre a guisa di fanciullo scherza,	3	that like a child is always darting here and there,

    tanto pareva già inver' la sera	4	so much appeared now to remain

essere al sol del suo corso rimaso;	5	of the sun's course toward nightfall:

vespero là, e qui mezza notte era.	6	it was vespers there and midnight here on earth.

    E i raggi ne ferien per mezzo 'l naso,	7	The rays were striking full into our faces,

perché per noi girato era sì 'l monte,	8	for we had circled so much of the mountain

che già dritti andavamo inver' l'occaso,	9	that we were heading straight into the west,

    quand' io senti' a me gravar la fronte	10	when such great splendor overwhelmed my sight,

a lo splendore assai più che di prima,	11	greater than any I had seen before,

e stupor m'eran le cose non conte;	12	that I was dazed by its unfamiliar brightness.

    ond' io levai le mani inver' la cima	13	I raised one hand above my brow

de le mie ciglia, e fecimi 'l solecchio,	14	and gave my eyes sufficient shade

che del soverchio visibile lima.	15	to temper this excess of light.

    Come quando da l'acqua o da lo specchio	16	As, when from water or a mirror, a reflected beam

salta lo raggio a l'opposita parte,	17	leaps back the other way, rising

salendo sù per lo modo parecchio	18	at the angle it took in its descent,

    a quel che scende, e tanto si diparte	19	and from the plumb line of a stone

dal cader de la pietra in igual tratta,	20	will deviate an equal distance,

sì come mostra esperïenza e arte;	21	as shown by science and experiment,

    così mi parve da luce rifratta	22	it seemed to me that I was struck

quivi dinanzi a me esser percosso;	23	by such bright light reflected there before me

per che a fuggir la mia vista fu ratta.	24	that my eyes were quick to turn away.

    "Che è quel, dolce padre, a che non posso	25	'What is that, gentle father,' I asked,

schermar lo viso tanto che mi vaglia,"	26	'from which I cannot even screen my eyes?

diss' io, "e pare inver' noi esser mosso?"	27	It seems to be moving toward us.'

    "Non ti maravigliar s'ancor t'abbaglia	28	'Don't be surprised,' he answered me,

la famiglia del cielo," a me rispuose:	29	'if those who live in Heaven still can blind you:

"messo è che viene ad invitar ch'om saglia.	30	this messenger invites us to ascend.

    Tosto sarà ch'a veder queste cose	31	'Soon the sight of beings such as these

non ti fia grave, ma fieti diletto	32	will not be burdensome, will give as much delight

quanto natura a sentir ti dispuose."	33	as nature made you fit to feel.'

    Poi giunti fummo a l'angel benedetto,	34	When we had reached the blessèd angel

con lieta voce disse: "Intrate quinci	35	he called out in a joyful voice: 'Now enter here

ad un scaleo vie men che li altri eretto."	36	on a stairway far less steep than were the others.'

    Noi montavam, già partiti di linci,	37	As we ascended, moving on from there,

e "Beati misericordes!" fue	38	we heard 'Beati misericordes' sung behind us

cantato retro, e "Godi tu che vinci!"	39	and 'Rejoice, you who conquer.'

    Lo mio maestro e io soli amendue	40	My master and I, alone again,

suso andavamo; e io pensai, andando,	41	were climbing, and as we went along,

prode acquistar ne le parole sue;	42	hoping to take some profit from his words,

    e dirizza'mi a lui sì dimandando:	43	I turned to him and asked:

"Che volse dir lo spirto di Romagna,	44	'What did the spirit from Romagna mean

e 'divieto' e 'consorte' menzionando?"	45	when he spoke of things that can't be shared?'

    Per ch'elli a me: "Di sua maggior magagna	46	He replied: 'Of his worst fault he knows the cost.

conosce il danno; e però non s'ammiri	47	Thus it is no wonder he condemns it, in the hope

se ne riprende perché men si piagna.	48	that fewer souls will have a reason to lament.

    Perché s'appuntano i vostri disiri	49	'Because your appetites are fixed on things

dove per compagnia parte si scema,	50	that, divided, lessen each one's share,

invidia move il mantaco a' sospiri.	51	envy's bellows pushes breath into your sighs.

    Ma se l'amor de la spera supprema	52	'But if love for the highest sphere

torcesse in suso il disiderio vostro,	53	could turn your longings toward heavenly things,

non vi sarebbe al petto quella tema;	54	then fear of sharing would pass from your hearts.

    ché, per quanti si dice più lì 'nostro,'	55	'For there above, when more souls speak of ours,

tanto possiede più di ben ciascuno,	56	the more of goodness each one owns,

e più di caritate arde in quel chiostro."	57	the more of love burning in that cloister.'

    "Io son d'esser contento più digiuno,"	58	'I am more starved for answers,' I said,

diss' io, "che se mi fosse pria taciuto,	59	'than if before I had kept silent,

e più di dubbio ne la mente aduno.	60	since now my mind is filled with greater doubt.

    Com' esser puote ch'un ben, distributo	61	'How can it be that a good, distributed,

in più posseditor, faccia più ricchi	62	can enrich a greater number of possessors

di sé che se da pochi è posseduto?"	63	than if it were possessed by few?'

    Ed elli a me: "Però che tu rificchi	64	And he to me: 'Because you still

la mente pur a le cose terrene,	65	have your mind fixed on earthly things,

di vera luce tenebre dispicchi.	66	you harvest darkness from the light itself.

    Quello infinito e ineffabil bene	67	'That infinite and ineffable Good,

che là sù è, così corre ad amore	68	which dwells on high, speeds toward love

com' a lucido corpo raggio vene.	69	as a ray of sunlight to a shining body.

    Tanto si dà quanto trova d'ardore;	70	'It returns the love it finds in equal measure,

sì che, quantunque carità si stende,	71	so that, if more of ardor is extended,

cresce sovr' essa l'etterno valore.	72	eternal Goodness will augment Its own.

    E quanta gente più là sù s'intende,	73	'And the more souls there are who love on high,

più v'è da bene amare, e più vi s'ama,	74	the more there is to love, the more of loving,

e come specchio l'uno a l'altro rende.	75	for like a mirror each returns it to the other.

    E se la mia ragion non ti disfama,	76	'And if my words do not requite your hunger,

vedrai Beatrice, ed ella pienamente	77	you shall see Beatrice. She will deliver you

ti torrà questa e ciascun' altra brama.	78	entirely from this and every other craving.

    Procaccia pur che tosto sieno spente,	79	'Seek only that the five wounds healed

come son già le due, le cinque piaghe,	80	by being painful soon may be closed up,

che si richiudon per esser dolente."	81	as the other two already are.'

    Com' io voleva dicer "Tu m'appaghe,"	82	I was about to say: 'You give me satisfaction,'

vidimi giunto in su l'altro girone,	83	when I saw that I had reached another terrace,

sì che tacer mi fer le luci vaghe.	84	and my eager eyes made me keep silent.

    Ivi mi parve in una visïone	85	There it seemed to me I was caught up

estatica di sùbito esser tratto,	86	in an ecstatic, sudden vision

e vedere in un tempio più persone;	87	in which I saw a temple full of people

    e una donna, in su l'entrar, con atto	88	and, at the door, about to enter, a woman,

dolce di madre dicer: "Figliuol mio,	89	with the sweet demeanor of a mother, who said:

perché hai tu così verso noi fatto?	90	'My son, why have you dealt with us like this?

    Ecco, dolenti, lo tuo padre e io	91	'Behold, your father and I have searched

ti cercavamo." E come qui si tacque,	92	for you in sorrow.' Just as she now was silent,

ciò che pareva prima, dispario.	93	so did that which brought her leave my sight.

    Indi m'apparve un'altra con quell' acque	94	Then there appeared to me another woman,

giù per le gote che 'l dolor distilla	95	tears of grief still running down her cheeks

quando di gran dispetto in altrui nacque,	96	from anger at the one whom she disdained.

    e dir: "Se tu se' sire de la villa	97	She said: 'If you are indeed lord of this city,

del cui nome ne' dèi fu tanta lite,	98	whose naming caused such strife among the gods

e onde ogne scïenza disfavilla,	99	and from which so much knowledge lights the world,

    vendica te di quelle braccia ardite	100	'avenge yourself on those bold arms

ch'abbracciar nostra figlia, o Pisistràto."	101	that dared embrace our daughter, Pisistratus.'

E 'l segnor mi parea, benigno e mite,	102	And it seemed to me that lord gave gracious answer,

    risponder lei con viso temperato:	103	offered gently and with tranquil look:

"Che farem noi a chi mal ne disira,	104	'What shall we do to one who seeks our harm

se quei che ci ama è per noi condannato?"	105	if we condemn the one who loves us?'

    Poi vidi genti accese in foco d'ira	106	Then I saw people, aflame with burning wrath,

con pietre un giovinetto ancider, forte	107	stoning a youth to death,

gridando a sé pur: "Martira, martira!"	108	and each was screaming to himself, "Kill, kill."

    E lui vedea chinarsi, per la morte	109	And I saw him sinking to the ground--

che l'aggravava già, inver' la terra,	110	for death was heavy on him now--

ma de li occhi facea sempre al ciel porte,	111	but keeping his eyes open to Heaven,

    orando a l'alto Sire, in tanta guerra,	112	as he begged the Lord on high to pardon

che perdonasse a' suoi persecutori,	113	his persecutors, from the depth of his agony,

con quello aspetto che pietà diserra.	114	with a look that unlocks compassion.

    Quando l'anima mia tornò di fori	115	When my soul made its way back

a le cose che son fuor di lei vere,	116	to the things that are real outside it,

io riconobbi i miei non falsi errori.	117	I came to know my errors were not false.

    Lo duca mio, che mi potea vedere	118	My leader, who could see that I was acting

far sì com' om che dal sonno si slega,	119	like one who shakes himself from sleep, said:

disse: "Che hai che non ti puoi tenere,	120	'What's wrong with you that you can't walk straight

    ma se' venuto più che mezza lega	121	'but have come now more than half a league

velando li occhi e con le gambe avvolte,	122	with your eyes veiled and your legs entangled,

a guisa di cui vino o sonno piega?"	123	like a man overcome by wine or sleep?'

    "O dolce padre mio, se tu m'ascolte,	124	'O my dear father,' I said, 'if you'll but listen,

io ti dirò," diss' io, "ciò che m'apparve	125	I will tell you exactly what I saw

quando le gambe mi furon sì tolte."	126	when my legs were taken from me.'

    Ed ei: "Se tu avessi cento larve	127	And he: 'If over your face you wore

sovra la faccia, non mi sarian chiuse	128	a hundred masks, even your faintest thoughts

le tue cogitazion, quantunque parve.	129	would not be hidden from my sight.

    Ciò che vedesti fu perché non scuse	130	'These things were shown so you would not refuse

d'aprir lo core a l'acque de la pace	131	to open your heart to the waters of peace

che da l'etterno fonte son diffuse.	132	that pour from the eternal fountain.

    Non dimandai 'Che hai?' per quel che face	133	'I did not ask "What's wrong?" for your resemblance

chi guarda pur con l'occhio che non vede,	134	to a man who stares with but unseeing eyes

quando disanimato il corpo giace;	135	when his body lies insensate,

    ma dimandai per darti forza al piede:	136	'but asked to put fresh vigor in your step.

così frugar conviensi i pigri, lenti	137	So must the sluggard, slow to use his waking hours

ad usar lor vigilia quando riede."	138	even once these come, be spurred to act.'

    Noi andavam per lo vespero, attenti	139	We went along through the evening hour,

oltre quanto potean li occhi allungarsi	140	forcing our eyes to seek the farthest point ahead

contra i raggi serotini e lucenti.	141	against the bright late beams,

    Ed ecco a poco a poco un fummo farsi	142	when, little by little, a smoke moved toward us,

verso di noi come la notte oscuro;	143	black as night, and there was nowhere

né da quello era loco da cansarsi.	144	we could escape from it. And first it took away

Questo ne tolse li occhi e l'aere puro.	145	the pureness of the air and then our sight.

Copyright © 1997-1998 The Trustees of Princeton University and Prof. Robert Hollander.
All Rights Reserved. Use of this site is governed by Terms and Conditions of Use/Legal Notices in connection with the use of this web site.
Thank you for visiting. And for reading the fine print. Bugs? Comments?









































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































commedia	minor works	multimedia	lectures	site info	help	search
