
PHILOLOGY Column Image.	COMMENTARY Column Image.	TOYNBEE Column Image.	DARTMOUTH DANTE PROJECT Column Image.	AUDIO Column Image.	IMAGES Column Image.
Move to the Princeton Dante Project home.	Move to the start of Canto 12
Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.
Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 11, Lines 1:200	Move to the Summary Page.	Move to the table of contents.	Move to the Search Page.	Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 13, Lines 1:200

    Di pari, come buoi che vanno a giogo,	1	As oxen go beneath their yoke

m'andava io con quell' anima carca,	2	that overladen soul and I went side by side

fin che 'l sofferse il dolce pedagogo.	3	as long as my dear escort granted.

    Ma quando disse: "Lascia lui e varca;	4	But when he said: 'Leave him and hurry on,

ché qui è buono con l'ali e coi remi,	5	for it is fitting here, with all your strength,

quantunque può, ciascun pinger sua barca";	6	to speed your ship with wings and oars,'

    dritto sì come andar vuolsi rife'mi	7	I straightened up, erect,

con la persona, avvegna che i pensieri	8	as one should walk, but still my thoughts

mi rimanessero e chinati e scemi.	9	remained bowed down and shrunken.

    Io m'era mosso, e seguia volontieri	10	I set out, following gladly

del mio maestro i passi, e amendue	11	in my master's steps, and our easy stride

già mostravam com' eravam leggeri;	12	made clear how light we felt.

    ed el mi disse: "Volgi li occhi in giùe:	13	And he to me: 'Cast down your eyes.

buon ti sarà, per tranquillar la via,	14	It will be good for you and calm you on your way

veder lo letto de le piante tue."	15	to look down at the bed beneath your feet.'

    Come, perché di lor memoria sia,	16	As gravestones set above the buried dead

sovra i sepolti le tombe terragne	17	bear witness to what once they were,

portan segnato quel ch'elli eran pria,	18	their carven images recalling them to mind,

    onde lì molte volte si ripiagne	19	making us grieve with frequent tears

per la puntura de la rimembranza,	20	when recollection pricks and spurs

che solo a' pïi dà de le calcagne;	21	the faithful heart with memories,

    sì vid' io lì, ma di miglior sembianza	22	so were these figures sculpted there

secondo l'artificio, figurato	23	along that road carved from the mountainside,

quanto per via di fuor del monte avanza.	24	but in their artistry more true in their resemblance.

    Vedea colui che fu nobil creato	25	My eyes beheld the one, created nobler

più ch'altra creatura, giù dal cielo	26	than any other creature, fall like lightning

folgoreggiando scender, da l'un lato.	27	from the sky, over to one side.

    Vedëa Brïareo fitto dal telo	28	My eyes beheld Briarèus, on the other,

celestïal giacer, da l'altra parte,	29	transfixed by the celestial bolt,

grave a la terra per lo mortal gelo.	30	now heavy on the earth in chill of death.

    Vedea Timbreo, vedea Pallade e Marte,	31	My eyes beheld Thymbraeus, Pallas, and Mars,

armati ancora, intorno al padre loro,	32	still armed, together with their father,

mirar le membra d'i Giganti sparte.	33	astounded by the giants' scattered limbs.

    Vedea Nembròt a piè del gran lavoro	34	My eyes beheld Nimrod at the base of his great work,

quasi smarrito, e riguardar le genti	35	as though bewildered, and the people,

che 'n Sennaàr con lui superbi fuoro.	36	who in Shinar shared his pride, all looking on.

    O Nïobè, con che occhi dolenti	37	Ah, Niobe, I saw you sculpted in the roadway,

vedea io te segnata in su la strada,	38	your eyes welling up with grief,

tra sette e sette tuoi figliuoli spenti!	39	amidst your dead, seven sons and seven daughters.

    O Saùl, come in su la propria spada	40	Ah, Saul, you too appeared there, dead

quivi parevi morto in Gelboè,	41	on your own sword in the mountains of Gilboa,

che poi non sentì pioggia né rugiada!	42	which never after knew the rain or dew.

    O folle Aragne, sì vedea io te	43	Ah, mad Arachne, I saw you all but turned

già mezza ragna, trista in su li stracci	44	to spider, wretched on the strands

de l'opera che mal per te si fé.	45	you spun, which did you so much harm.

    O Roboàm, già non par che minacci	46	Ah, Rehoboam, now your image does not seem

quivi 'l tuo segno; ma pien di spavento	47	to menace but to cower. A chariot bears it off--

nel porta un carro, sanza ch'altri il cacci.	48	and there is no one giving chase.

    Mostrava ancor lo duro pavimento	49	Now was shown, on that hard floor,

come Almeon a sua madre fé caro	50	how Alcmaeon made that necklace, ill-omened,

parer lo sventurato addornamento.	51	seem not worth the price his mother paid.

    Mostrava come i figli si gittaro	52	Now was shown how his sons fell upon

sovra Sennacherìb dentro dal tempio,	53	Sennacherib inside the temple,

e come, morto lui, quivi il lasciaro.	54	and how, slain, they left him there.

    Mostrava la ruina e 'l crudo scempio	55	Now was shown the destruction and cruel slaughter

che fé Tamiri, quando disse a Ciro:	56	wrought by Tomyris when she said to Cyrus:

"Sangue sitisti, e io di sangue t'empio."	57	'You thirsted for blood. Now drink your fill.'

    Mostrava come in rotta si fuggiro	58	Now was shown the Assyrians routed and in flight

li Assiri, poi che fu morto Oloferne,	59	after the slaying of Holofernes

e anche le reliquie del martiro.	60	and the leavings of that slaughter.

    Vedeva Troia in cenere e in caverne;	61	My eyes beheld Troy in ashes and in ruins.

o Ilïón, come te basso e vile	62	Ah, Ilion, how reduced and shamed you were

mostrava il segno che lì si discerne!	63	now was shown within the carving.

    Qual di pennel fu maestro o di stile	64	What master of the brush and stylus

che ritraesse l'ombre e ' tratti ch'ivi	65	could have designed these forms and outlines

mirar farieno uno ingegno sottile?	66	that would astound even the truest talent?

    Morti li morti e i vivi parean vivi:	67	Dead seemed the dead, living seemed the living.

non vide mei di me chi vide il vero,	68	He who beheld the real events on which I walked,

quant' io calcai, fin che chinato givi.	69	head bent, saw them no better than did I.

    Or superbite, e via col viso altero,	70	Wax proud then, go your way with head held high,

figliuoli d'Eva, e non chinate il volto	71	you sons of Eve, and no, do not bend down your face

sì che veggiate il vostro mal sentero!	72	and so reflect upon your evil path!

    Più era già per noi del monte vòlto	73	We had done more of the mountain's circle

e del cammin del sole assai più speso	74	and the sun had sped along its track

che non stimava l'animo non sciolto,	75	more than my mind, being bound, had reckoned,

    quando colui che sempre innanzi atteso	76	when he, who always looked before him

andava, cominciò: "Drizza la testa;	77	as he went, spoke out: 'Raise your head!

non è più tempo di gir sì sospeso.	78	This is not the time for walking so absorbed.

    Vedi colà un angel che s'appresta	79	'See the angel over there, preparing

per venir verso noi; vedi che torna	80	to approach. See the sixth handmaid who returns

dal servigio del dì l'ancella sesta.	81	from her service of the day.

    Di reverenza il viso e li atti addorna,	82	'Show reverence in your face and bearing

sì che i diletti lo 'nvïarci in suso;	83	so that he may be pleased to send us upward.

pensa che questo dì mai non raggiorna!"	84	Consider that this day will never dawn again.'

    Io era ben del suo ammonir uso	85	I was accustomed to his admonitions

pur di non perder tempo, sì che 'n quella	86	not to waste my time, so that on this matter

materia non potea parlarmi chiuso.	87	his speech was not obscure.

    A noi venìa la creatura bella,	88	The fair creature, garbed in white,

biancovestito e ne la faccia quale	89	came toward us. In his face there was what seemed

par tremolando mattutina stella.	90	the shimmering of the morning star.

    Le braccia aperse, e indi aperse l'ale;	91	Opening his arms, he spread his wings

disse: "Venite: qui son presso i gradi,	92	and said: 'Come, the steps are here at hand.

e agevolemente omai si sale.	93	From here on up the climb is easy.

    A questo invito vegnon molto radi:	94	'They are very few who answer to this bidding.

o gente umana, per volar sù nata,	95	O race of man, born to fly on high,

perché a poco vento così cadi?"	96	why does a puff of wind cause you to fall?'

    Menocci ove la roccia era tagliata;	97	He brought us where the rock was cleft,

quivi mi batté l'ali per la fronte;	98	there tapped my forehead with his wings,

poi mi promise sicura l'andata.	99	then promised me that going on I would be safe.

    Come a man destra, per salire al monte	100	Just as, to climb the hillside where the church is set

dove siede la chiesa che soggioga	101	which, over Rubaconte, dominates

la ben guidata sopra Rubaconte,	102	the justly governed city, there on the right

    si rompe del montar l'ardita foga	103	the sheer slope of the steep ascent is cut

per le scalee che si fero ad etade	104	by stairs that were constructed in a time

ch'era sicuro il quaderno e la doga;	105	when registers and measures could be trusted,

    così s'allenta la ripa che cade	106	even so the bank that sharply falls away

quivi ben ratta da l'altro girone;	107	from the higher circle is made gentler, except

ma quinci e quindi l'alta pietra rade.	108	that here and there the towering rock scrapes close.

    Noi volgendo ivi le nostre persone,	109	While we were moving off in that direction,

"Beati pauperes spiritu!" voci	110	'Beati pauperes spiritu' a voice was singing

cantaron sì, che nol diria sermone.	111	in tones that speech could not express.

    Ahi quanto son diverse quelle foci	112	Ah, how different these entrances from those of Hell,

da l'infernali! ché quivi per canti	113	for here one's coming in is met with songs

s'entra, e là giù per lamenti feroci.	114	but there with savage lamentation!

    Già montavam su per li scaglion santi,	115	Now we were climbing on the hallowed stairs

ed esser mi parea troppo più lieve	116	and I felt so much lighter than before,

che per lo pian non mi parea davanti.	117	when the ground I trod was level,

    Ond' io: "Maestro, dì, qual cosa greve	118	that I said: 'Master, tell me,

levata s'è da me, che nulla quasi	119	what weight has been lifted from me

per me fatica, andando, si riceve?"	120	that going on is hardly any effort?'

    Rispuose: "Quando i P che son rimasi	121	He answered: 'When the P's that still remain

ancor nel volto tuo presso che stinti,	122	upon your brow, though very faint, shall be,

saranno, com' è l'un, del tutto rasi,	123	as one already is, erased,

    fier li tuoi piè dal buon voler sì vinti,	124	'your legs shall be so mastered by good will,

che non pur non fatica sentiranno,	125	not only will they feel no effort going up,

ma fia diletto loro esser sù pinti."	126	but they will take delight in being urged to.'

    Allor fec' io come color che vanno	127	Then I did as those who go along,

con cosa in capo non da lor saputa,	128	with something on their head, unknown to them,

se non che ' cenni altrui sospecciar fanno;	129	except the acts of others make them wonder,

    per che la mano ad accertar s'aiuta,	130	so that they reach up with their hand for answers.

e cerca e truova e quello officio adempie	131	Touching and searching they accomplish

che non si può fornir per la veduta;	132	the task that sight cannot achieve,

    e con le dita de la destra scempie	133	and, spreading the fingers of my right hand,

trovai pur sei le lettere che 'ncise	134	I found that, of the seven letters he of the keys

quel da le chiavi a me sovra le tempie:	135	had traced upon my forehead, only six remained.

a che guardando, il mio duca sorrise.	136	Observing this, my leader smiled.

Copyright © 1997-1998 The Trustees of Princeton University and Prof. Robert Hollander.
All Rights Reserved. Use of this site is governed by Terms and Conditions of Use/Legal Notices in connection with the use of this web site.
Thank you for visiting. And for reading the fine print. Bugs? Comments?



























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































commedia	minor works	multimedia	lectures	site info	help	search
