
PHILOLOGY Column Image.	COMMENTARY Column Image.	TOYNBEE Column Image.	DARTMOUTH DANTE PROJECT Column Image.	AUDIO Column Image.	IMAGES Column Image.
Move to the Princeton Dante Project home.	Move to the start of Canto 26
Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.
Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 25, Lines 1:200	Move to the Summary Page.	Move to the table of contents.	Move to the Search Page.	Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 27, Lines 1:200

    Mentre che sì per l'orlo, uno innanzi altro,	1	One before the other, we walked along the edge,

ce n'andavamo, e spesso il buon maestro	2	and often the good master said to me:

diceami: "Guarda: giovi ch'io ti scaltro";	3	'Be careful now, pay attention to my warnings.'

    feriami il sole in su l'omero destro,	4	The sun was beating down on my right shoulder,

che già, raggiando, tutto l'occidente	5	for now its beams were changing

mutava in bianco aspetto di cilestro;	6	the aspect of the west from blue to white

    e io facea con l'ombra più rovente	7	and, as my shadow made the flames appear

parer la fiamma; e pur a tanto indizio	8	more glowing, I saw that many of the shades,

vidi molt' ombre, andando, poner mente.	9	as they went past, took note of that faint sign.

    Questa fu la cagion che diede inizio	10	It was this that made them speak of me,

loro a parlar di me; e cominciarsi	11	and they began by telling one another:

a dir: "Colui non par corpo fittizio";	12	'This man's body does not seem made of air.'

    poi verso me, quanto potëan farsi,	13	Then some of them came up as near me

certi si fero, sempre con riguardo	14	as they could, always careful not to venture

di non uscir dove non fosser arsi.	15	beyond the burning of the flames.

    "O tu che vai, non per esser più tardo,	16	'O you who go along behind the others,

ma forse reverente, a li altri dopo,	17	not from sloth but perhaps with reverence,

rispondi a me che 'n sete e 'n foco ardo.	18	answer me, since I burn with thirst and fire.

    Né solo a me la tua risposta è uopo;	19	'It is not I alone who crave your answer.

ché tutti questi n'hanno maggior sete	20	All these others thirst for it more than the Indian

che d'acqua fredda Indo o Etïopo.	21	or Ethiopian who craves cold water.

    Dinne com' è che fai di te parete	22	'Tell us, how can it be your body makes

al sol, pur come tu non fossi ancora	23	a wall against the sun, as if you were

di morte intrato dentro da la rete."	24	not yet entangled in the net of death?'

    Sì mi parlava un d'essi; e io mi fora	25	asked one of them. I would have then

già manifesto, s'io non fossi atteso	26	made myself known had I not been intent

ad altra novità ch'apparve allora;	27	on another strange new sight that now appeared,

    ché per lo mezzo del cammino acceso	28	for in the middle of the flaming road

venne gente col viso incontro a questa,	29	came people moving in the opposite direction

la qual mi fece a rimirar sospeso.	30	who had me staring, all absorbed.

    Lì veggio d'ogne parte farsi presta	31	There I can see that every shade of either group

ciascun' ombra e basciarsi una con una	32	makes haste to kiss another, without stopping,

sanza restar, contente a brieve festa;	33	and is content with such brief salutation,

    così per entro loro schiera bruna	34	just as, within their dark-hued files,

s'ammusa l'una con l'altra formica,	35	one ant will put its face up to the other's,

forse a spïar lor via e lor fortuna.	36	perhaps to inquire of his path and fortune.

    Tosto che parton l'accoglienza amica,	37	When they have ceased their friendly greeting,

prima che 'l primo passo lì trascorra,	38	before they take a new step to continue,

sopragridar ciascuna s'affatica:	39	each one makes an effort to outshout the rest.

    la nova gente: "Soddoma e Gomorra";	40	The new ones cry: 'Sodom and Gomorrah!'

e l'altra: "Ne la vacca entra Pasife,	41	and the others: 'Pasiphaë crawls into the cow

perché 'l torello a sua lussuria corra."	42	so that the bull may hasten to her lust.'

    Poi, come grue ch'a le montagne Rife	43	Then, as though cranes were flying, some toward

volasser parte, e parte inver' l'arene,	44	cool Riphaean mountains and some toward desert sands,

queste del gel, quelle del sole schife,	45	these shunning frost and those the sun,

    l'una gente sen va, l'altra sen vene;	46	the one crowd goes, the other nears,

e tornan, lagrimando, a' primi canti	47	and all return, weeping, to their former song

e al gridar che più lor si convene;	48	and to the cry that most befits them.

    e raccostansi a me, come davanti,	49	Then the same shades who had entreated me

essi medesmi che m'avean pregato,	50	drew nearer, as they had before,

attenti ad ascoltar ne' lor sembianti.	51	and seemed all eagerness to hear me out.

    Io, che due volte avea visto lor grato,	52	Having twice been made aware of their desire,

incominciai: "O anime sicure	53	I began: 'O souls secure of gaining,

d'aver, quando che sia, di pace stato,	54	whenever it may be, the state of peace,

    non son rimase acerbe né mature	55	'my limbs have not been left on earth,

le membra mie di là, ma son qui meco	56	whether green or dried, but are here with me

col sangue suo e con le sue giunture.	57	intact, in all their blood and joints.

    Quinci sù vo per non esser più cieco;	58	'I climb from here no longer to be blind.

donna è di sopra che m'acquista grazia,	59	A lady is above through whom I gained the grace

per che 'l mortal per vostro mondo reco.	60	to bring my mortal parts into your world.

    Ma se la vostra maggior voglia sazia	61	'But, so may your greatest longing

tosto divegna, sì che 'l ciel v'alberghi	62	soon be satisfied and the heaven take you in

ch'è pien d'amore e più ampio si spazia,	63	that is so full of love and holds the widest space,

    ditemi, acciò ch'ancor carte ne verghi,	64	'tell me, that I may trace it on my pages,

chi siete voi, e chi è quella turba	65	who you are and who is in that throng

che se ne va di retro a' vostri terghi."	66	which is even now receding at your backs?'

    Non altrimenti stupido si turba	67	Not less astounded is the mountaineer,

lo montanaro, e rimirando ammuta,	68	struck dumb and staring all around him

quando rozzo e salvatico s'inurba,	69	when rough and rustic he comes into a town,

    che ciascun' ombra fece in sua paruta;	70	than each shade seemed from its expression.

ma poi che furon di stupore scarche,	71	But once they had recovered from amazement,

lo qual ne li alti cuor tosto s'attuta,	72	which is quickly overcome in noble hearts,

    "Beato te, che de le nostre marche,"	73	he who had questioned me began again:

ricominciò colei che pria m'inchiese,	74	'Blessed are you, who, to die a better death,

"per morir meglio, esperïenza imbarche!	75	here take on board the knowledge that you gain.

    La gente che non vien con noi, offese	76	'Those, who come not with us, all offended

di ciò per che già Cesar, trïunfando,	77	the same way Caesar did, for which, in triumph,

'Regina' contra sé chiamar s'intese:	78	he once heard "queen" called out against him.

    però si parton 'Soddoma' gridando,	79	'Thus they move on crying "Sodom,"

rimproverando a sé com' hai udito,	80	as you heard, in self-reproach.

e aiutan l'arsura vergognando.	81	And with their shame they fan the flames.

    Nostro peccato fu ermafrodito;	82	'Hermaphroditic was our sin.

ma perché non servammo umana legge,	83	Because we did not follow human law,

seguendo come bestie l'appetito,	84	but ran behind our appetites like beasts,

    in obbrobrio di noi, per noi si legge,	85	'when, in our disgrace, we move off from the others

quando partinci, il nome di colei	86	we shout her name who made herself a beast

che s'imbestiò ne le 'mbestiate schegge.	87	inside the beast-shaped rough-hewn wood.

    Or sai nostri atti e di che fummo rei:	88	'Now you know our deeds and know our guilt.

se forse a nome vuo' saper chi semo,	89	If, perhaps, you would like to know our names,

tempo non è di dire, e non saprei.	90	there is no time to tell and I would not know how.

    Farotti ben di me volere scemo:	91	'About myself, indeed, I'll satisfy your wish.

son Guido Guinizzelli, e già mi purgo	92	I am Guido Guinizzelli, come so far in my purgation

per ben dolermi prima ch'a lo stremo."	93	because I felt true sorrow well before the end.'

    Quali ne la tristizia di Ligurgo	94	As the two sons became on seeing their mother

si fer due figli a riveder la madre,	95	caught in Lycurgus' outraged grief,

tal mi fec' io, ma non a tanto insurgo,	96	so I became, if with less abandon,

    quand' io odo nomar sé stesso il padre	97	when he gave his name and I knew he had been

mio e de li altri miei miglior che mai	98	father to me and to others, my betters,

rime d'amor usar dolci e leggiadre;	99	who ever used love's sweet and graceful rhymes.

    e sanza udire e dir pensoso andai	100	And for a long time, deep in thought, I went on

lunga fïata rimirando lui,	101	without listening or speaking as I gazed at him,

né, per lo foco, in là più m'appressai.	102	but did not, for the fire, move closer.

    Poi che di riguardar pasciuto fui,	103	Once my eyes were satisfied,

tutto m'offersi pronto al suo servigio	104	I owned myself ready to do him service

con l'affermar che fa credere altrui.	105	with such assurance as compels belief.

    Ed elli a me: "Tu lasci tal vestigio,	106	He answered: 'All that I hear you tell

per quel ch'i' odo, in me, e tanto chiaro,	107	leaves so deep and clear a trace in me

che Letè nol può tòrre né far bigio.	108	that Lethe cannot wipe it out or make it dim,

    Ma se le tue parole or ver giuraro,	109	'but if your words just now have sworn the truth,

dimmi che è cagion per che dimostri	110	tell me what has caused you to disclose

nel dire e nel guardar d'avermi caro."	111	by speech and look that you still hold me dear.'

    E io a lui: "Li dolci detti vostri,	112	And I to him: 'Your sweet verses,

che, quanto durerà l'uso moderno,	113	which as long as modern custom lasts,

faranno cari ancora i loro incostri."	114	will make their very ink seem precious.'

    "O frate," disse, "questi ch'io ti cerno	115	'O brother,' he said, 'that one whom I point out

col dito," e additò un spirto innanzi,	116	to you'--and he pointed to a spirit just ahead--

"fu miglior fabbro del parlar materno.	117	'was a better craftsman of the mother tongue.

    Versi d'amore e prose di romanzi	118	'In verses of love and tales of romance

soverchiò tutti; e lascia dir li stolti	119	he surpassed them all, and let the fools go on

che quel di Lemosì credon ch'avanzi.	120	who think that fellow from Limoges was better.

    A voce più ch'al ver drizzan li volti,	121	'They favor hearsay over truth

e così ferman sua oppinïone	122	and thus arrive at their opinions

prima ch'arte o ragion per lor s'ascolti.	123	without the use of skill or reason.

    Così fer molti antichi di Guittone,	124	'The same was true of many long ago about Guittone,

di grido in grido pur lui dando pregio,	125	voice after voice shouting praise of him alone,

fin che l'ha vinto il ver con più persone.	126	until for most the truth at last prevailed.

    Or se tu hai sì ampio privilegio,	127	'Now, if you possess such ample privilege

che licito ti sia l'andare al chiostro	128	that you are allowed into the cloister

nel quale è Cristo abate del collegio,	129	where Christ is abbot of the brothers,

    falli per me un dir d'un paternostro,	130	'say a Paternoster there for me,

quanto bisogna a noi di questo mondo,	131	as much of it as we have need in this our world,

dove poter peccar non è più nostro."	132	where we no longer have the power to sin.'

    Poi, forse per dar luogo altrui secondo	133	Then, perhaps to make room for another

che presso avea, disparve per lo foco,	134	who was near him, he vanished through the fire

come per l'acqua il pesce andando al fondo.	135	as a fish glides to the bottom through the water.

    Io mi fei al mostrato innanzi un poco,	136	I edged forward a little toward the other

e dissi ch'al suo nome il mio disire	137	who had been pointed out and said that my desire

apparecchiava grazïoso loco.	138	prepared a place of welcome for his name,

    El cominciò liberamente a dire:	139	to which he readily made answer:

"Tan m'abellis vostre cortes deman,	140	'Your courteous question pleases me so much

qu'ieu no me puesc ni voill a vos cobrire.	141	I neither can nor would conceal myself from You.

    Ieu sui Arnaut, que plor e vau cantan;	142	'I am Arnaut, weeping and singing as I make my way.

consiros vei la passada folor,	143	I see with grief past follies and I see,

e vei jausen lo joi qu'esper, denan.	144	rejoicing, the joy I hope is coming.

    Ara vos prec, per aquella valor	145	'Now I pray You, by that power

que vos guida al som de l'escalina,	146	which guides You to the summit of the stairs,

sovenha vos a temps de ma dolor!"	147	to remember, when the time is fit, my pain.'

Poi s'ascose nel foco che li affina.	148	Then he vanished in the fire that refines them.

Copyright © 1997-1998 The Trustees of Princeton University and Prof. Robert Hollander.
All Rights Reserved. Use of this site is governed by Terms and Conditions of Use/Legal Notices in connection with the use of this web site.
Thank you for visiting. And for reading the fine print. Bugs? Comments?















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































commedia	minor works	multimedia	lectures	site info	help	search
