
PHILOLOGY Column Image.	COMMENTARY Column Image.	TOYNBEE Column Image.	DARTMOUTH DANTE PROJECT Column Image.	AUDIO Column Image.	IMAGES Column Image.
Move to the Princeton Dante Project home.	Move to the start of Canto 19
Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.
Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 18, Lines 1:200	Move to the Summary Page.	Move to the table of contents.	Move to the Search Page.	Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 20, Lines 1:200

    Ne l'ora che non può 'l calor dïurno	1	In the hour when the heat of day,

intepidar più 'l freddo de la luna,	2	cooled by earth and at times by Saturn,

vinto da terra, e talor da Saturno	3	can no longer temper the cold of the moon,

    --quando i geomanti lor Maggior Fortuna	4	when geomancers see their Fortuna Major

veggiono in orïente, innanzi a l'alba,	5	rise in the east before the dawn,

surger per via che poco le sta bruna--,	6	which does not long stay dark for it,

    mi venne in sogno una femmina balba,	7	there came to me a woman, in a dream,

ne li occhi guercia, e sovra i piè distorta,	8	stammering, cross-eyed, splayfooted,

con le man monche, e di colore scialba.	9	with crippled hands and sickly pale complexion.

    Io la mirava; e come 'l sol conforta	10	I looked at her, and as the sun revives

le fredde membra che la notte aggrava,	11	cold limbs benumbed by night,

così lo sguardo mio le facea scorta	12	so my gaze gave her a ready tongue

    la lingua, e poscia tutta la drizzava	13	and then in very little time

in poco d'ora, e lo smarrito volto,	14	straightened her crooked limbs

com' amor vuol, così le colorava.	15	and tinged her sallow face as love desires.

    Poi ch'ell' avea 'l parlar così disciolto,	16	And with her speech set free

cominciava a cantar sì, che con pena	17	she started singing in a way that would

da lei avrei mio intento rivolto.	18	have made it hard for me to turn aside.

    "Io son," cantava, "io son dolce serena,	19	'I am,' she sang, 'I am the sweet siren

che ' marinari in mezzo mar dismago;	20	who beguile mariners on distant seas,

tanto son di piacere a sentir piena!	21	so great is their delight in hearing me.

    Io volsi Ulisse del suo cammin vago	22	I drew Ulysses, eager for the journey,

al canto mio; e qual meco s'ausa,	23	with my song. And those who dwell with me

rado sen parte; sì tutto l'appago!"	24	rarely depart, so much do I content them.'

    Ancor non era sua bocca richiusa,	25	Her lips had not yet closed

quand' una donna apparve santa e presta	26	when there appeared a lady at my side,

lunghesso me per far colei confusa.	27	holy and alert, to confound her.

    "O Virgilio, Virgilio, chi è questa?"	28	'O Virgil, Virgil, who is this?'

fieramente dicea; ed el venìa	29	she asked, indignant. And he came forward

con li occhi fitti pur in quella onesta.	30	with his eyes fixed on that virtuous one.

    L'altra prendea, e dinanzi l'apria	31	The other he seized and, ripping her garments,

fendendo i drappi, e mostravami 'l ventre;	32	laid her front bare and exposed her belly.

quel mi svegliò col puzzo che n'uscia.	33	The stench that came from there awoke me.

    Io mossi li occhi, e 'l buon maestro: "Almen tre	34	I was looking around, and the good master said:

voci t'ho messe!" dicea, "Surgi e vieni;	35	'Three times at least I've called you. Arise and come.

troviam l'aperta per la qual tu entre."	36	Let us find the opening through which you enter.'

    Sù mi levai, e tutti eran già pieni	37	I stood up. All the circles of the holy mountain

de l'alto dì i giron del sacro monte,	38	were already filled with the advancing day

e andavam col sol novo a le reni.	39	and we went on with the new sun at our backs.

    Seguendo lui, portava la mia fronte	40	With furrowed brow I followed him,

come colui che l'ha di pensier carca,	41	as though burdened with a thought that bent

che fa di sé un mezzo arco di ponte;	42	my body like the half-arch of a bridge,

    quand' io udi' "Venite; qui si varca"	43	until I heard: 'Come, here is the passage,'

parlare in modo soave e benigno,	44	spoken in such gentle, gracious tones

qual non si sente in questa mortal marca.	45	as are not heard within these earthly confines.

    Con l'ali aperte, che parean di cigno,	46	With open wings that seemed a swan's

volseci in sù colui che sì parlonne	47	he that had spoken showed the way on up

tra due pareti del duro macigno.	48	between two walls of flinty stone

    Mosse le penne poi e ventilonne,	49	and, stirring his feathers, gently fanned us,

"Qui lugent" affermando esser beati,	50	declaring those qui lugent to be blessed,

ch'avran di consolar l'anime donne.	51	for their souls shall be comforted.

    "Che hai che pur inver' la terra guati?"	52	'What's wrong, that you keep staring at the ground?'

la guida mia incominciò a dirmi,	53	my guide began, once we were on our way,

poco amendue da l'angel sormontati.	54	leaving the angel just below.

    E io: "Con tanta sospeccion fa irmi	55	'I am so distracted going on,' I said,

novella visïon ch'a sé mi piega,	56	because this strange new dream so weighs on me

sì ch'io non posso dal pensar partirmi."	57	I cannot keep it from my mind.'

    "Vedesti," disse, "quell'antica strega	58	'You saw,' he said, 'that ancient witch

che sola sovr' a noi omai si piagne;	59	who alone is purged with tears above us here.

vedesti come l'uom da lei si slega.	60	And you saw how man is freed from her.

    Bastiti, e batti a terra le calcagne;	61	'Let that be enough. Press your heels

li occhi rivolgi al logoro che gira	62	into the ground. Raise your eyes to the lure

lo rege etterno con le rote magne."	63	the Eternal King spins with His majestic spheres.'

    Quale 'l falcon, che prima a' piè si mira,	64	Like the falcon that at first looks at its feet,

indi si volge al grido e si protende	65	and only then turns to the call and stretches up

per lo disio del pasto che là il tira,	66	in its desire for the food that draws it,

    tal mi fec' io; e tal, quanto si fende	67	such I became and, so impelled, I went

la roccia per dar via a chi va suso,	68	as far as the cleft rock allowed for the ascent

n'andai infin dove 'l cerchiar si prende.	69	to where the circling starts again.

    Com' io nel quinto giro fui dischiuso,	70	When I came out onto the ledge

vidi gente per esso che piangea,	71	of the fifth round, I saw people on it

giacendo a terra tutta volta in giuso.	72	lying face down on the ground and weeping.

    "Adhaesit pavimento anima mea"	73	'Adhaesit pavimento anima mea'

sentia dir lor con sì alti sospiri,	74	I heard them say with such deep sighs

che la parola a pena s'intendea.	75	the words could hardly be distinguished.

    "O eletti di Dio, li cui soffriri	76	'O chosen ones of God, whose sufferings

e giustizia e speranza fa men duri,	77	both hope and justice make less hard,

drizzate noi verso li alti saliri."	78	direct us to the steps that lead us up.'

    "Se voi venite dal giacer sicuri,	79	'If you are here exempt from lying prostrate

e volete trovar la via più tosto,	80	and wish to find the quickest way,

le vostre destre sien sempre di fori."	81	keep to the right along the outer rim.'

    Così pregò 'l poeta, e sì risposto	82	Thus the poet asked and thus came the response

poco dinanzi a noi ne fu; per ch'io	83	from a little way ahead, and I could tell who spoke

nel parlare avvisai l'altro nascosto,	84	although his face was hidden.

    e volsi li occhi a li occhi al segnor mio:	85	I turned my eyes to the eyes of my lord.

ond' elli m'assentì con lieto cenno	86	With a pleased sign he consented

ciò che chiedea la vista del disio.	87	to what my pleading look had asked.

    Poi ch'io potei di me fare a mio senno,	88	When I was free to do what I desired

trassimi sovra quella creatura	89	I drew away and stood above that soul

le cui parole pria notar mi fenno,	90	whose words had made me first aware of him,

    dicendo: "Spirto in cui pianger matura	91	saying: 'Spirit in whom weeping ripens

quel sanza 'l quale a Dio tornar non pòssi,	92	that without which there is no return to God,

sosta un poco per me tua maggior cura.	93	for my sake just a while neglect your greater care.

    Chi fosti e perché vòlti avete i dossi	94	'Tell me who you were and why you lie face down

al sù, mi dì, e se vuo' ch'io t'impetri	95	and whether there is something I might do

cosa di là ond' io vivendo mossi."	96	for you back there, where I set out alive.'

    Ed elli a me: "Perché i nostri diretri	97	And he to me: 'Why Heaven turns our backs

rivolga il cielo a sé, saprai; ma prima	98	against Itself, that you shall know, but first

scias quod ego fui successor Petri.	99	scias quod ego fui successor Petri.

    Intra Sïestri e Chiaveri s'adima	100	'Between Sestri and Chiàvari there runs down

una fiumana bella, e del suo nome	101	a lovely stream and with its name

lo titol del mio sangue fa sua cima.	102	the title of my line has marked its shield.

    Un mese e poco più prova' io come	103	'In a month and little more I learned how heavy

pesa il gran manto a chi dal fango il guarda,	104	the mantle weighs on one who keeps it from the mud,

che piuma sembran tutte l'altre some.	105	making any other burden seem a feather.

    La mia conversïone, omè!, fu tarda;	106	'My conversion, alas, came late--

ma, come fatto fui roman pastore,	107	when I was made the Roman shepherd,

così scopersi la vita bugiarda.	108	I discovered a life of lies.

    Vidi che lì non s'acquetava il core,	109	'I saw that there the heart was not at peace,

né più salir potiesi in quella vita;	110	nor was preferment possible in that life,

per che di questa in me s'accese amore.	111	and for this higher state my love was kindled.

    Fino a quel punto misera e partita	112	'Until that moment I was a wretched soul,

da Dio anima fui, del tutto avara;	113	cut off from God, and filled with avarice.

or, come vedi, qui ne son punita.	114	Now, as you see, I am punished for that here.

    Quel ch'avarizia fa, qui si dichiara	115	'The work of avarice is here proclaimed

in purgazion de l'anime converse;	116	in the purging of the down-turned souls,

e nulla pena il monte ha più amara.	117	and the mountain gives no punishment more bitter.

    Sì come l'occhio nostro non s'aderse	118	'Just as we failed to lift our eyes on high

in alto, fisso a le cose terrene,	119	because they were fixed on earthly things,

così giustizia qui a terra il merse.	120	so justice here has turned them to the earth.

    Come avarizia spense a ciascun bene	121	'As avarice quenched our love of worthy things,

lo nostro amore, onde operar perdési,	122	wasting our chance to do good works,

così giustizia qui stretti ne tene,	123	so justice here has bound us fast.

    ne' piedi e ne le man legati e presi;	124	'Securely tied are our hands and feet.

e quanto fia piacer del giusto Sire,	125	As long as it shall please the righteous Lord

tanto staremo immobili e distesi."	126	so long shall we, unmoving, lie here prone.'

    Io m'era inginocchiato e volea dire;	127	I had kneeled and was about to speak,

ma com' io cominciai ed el s'accorse,	128	but as soon as I began and he perceived,

solo ascoltando, del mio reverire,	129	only by listening, that I did him reverence,

    "Qual cagion," disse, "in giù così ti torse?"	130	'Why,' he asked, 'did you bend down that way?'

E io a lui: "Per vostra dignitate	131	And I: 'Because the dignity of Your high office

mia coscïenza dritto mi rimorse."	132	stung my conscience as I stood erect.'

    "Drizza le gambe, lèvati sù, frate!"	133	'Straighten your legs, stand up, brother,'

rispuose; "non errar: conservo sono	134	he replied, 'make no mistake. I am a fellow-servant

teco e con li altri ad una podestate.	135	with you, and with the others, of a single Power.

    Se mai quel santo evangelico suono	136	'If ever you did understand the holy passage

che dice 'Neque nubent' intendesti,	137	in the Gospel where it says "Neque nubent,"

ben puoi veder perch' io così ragiono.	138	you may well perceive just why I say this.

    Vattene omai: non vo' che più t'arresti;	139	'Now go your way. I would not keep you longer,

ché la tua stanza mio pianger disagia,	140	for your being here impedes the tears

col qual maturo ciò che tu dicesti.	141	with which I ripen that of which you spoke.

    Nepote ho io di là c'ha nome Alagia,	142	'On earth I have a niece who is called Alàgia--

buona da sé, pur che la nostra casa	143	she is still virtuous, if indeed our house

non faccia lei per essempro malvagia;	144	has not by its example made her wicked,

e questa sola di là m'è rimasa."	145	and she alone is left to me back there.'

Copyright © 1997-1998 The Trustees of Princeton University and Prof. Robert Hollander.
All Rights Reserved. Use of this site is governed by Terms and Conditions of Use/Legal Notices in connection with the use of this web site.
Thank you for visiting. And for reading the fine print. Bugs? Comments?













































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































commedia	minor works	multimedia	lectures	site info	help	search
