
PHILOLOGY Column Image.	COMMENTARY Column Image.	TOYNBEE Column Image.	DARTMOUTH DANTE PROJECT Column Image.	AUDIO Column Image.	IMAGES Column Image.
Move to the Princeton Dante Project home.	Move to the start of Canto 31
Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.
Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 30, Lines 1:200	Move to the Summary Page.	Move to the table of contents.	Move to the Search Page.	Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 32, Lines 1:200

    "O tu che se' di là dal fiume sacro,"	1	'O you on the far side of the sacred stream,'

volgendo suo parlare a me per punta,	2	turning the point of her words on me

che pur per taglio m'era paruto acro,	3	that had seemed sharp enough with their edge,

    ricominciò, seguendo sanza cunta,	4	she then went on without a pause: 'Say it,

"dì, dì se questo è vero; a tanta accusa	5	say if this is true. To such an accusation

tua confession conviene esser congiunta."	6	your confession must be joined.'

    Era la mia virtù tanto confusa,	7	My faculties were so confounded

che la voce si mosse, e pria si spense	8	that my voice struggled up but spent itself

che da li organi suoi fosse dischiusa.	9	before it made its way out of my mouth.

    Poco sofferse; poi disse: "Che pense?	10	For a moment she held back, then asked:

Rispondi a me; ché le memorie triste	11	'What are you thinking? Speak, for your memories

in te non sono ancor da l'acqua offense."	12	of sin have not been washed away by water yet.'

    Confusione e paura insieme miste	13	Confusion and fear, mixed together,

mi pinsero un tal "sì" fuor de la bocca,	14	drove from my mouth a yes--

al quale intender fuor mestier le viste.	15	but one had need of eyes to hear it.

    Come balestro frange, quando scocca	16	As a crossbow breaks with too much tension

da troppa tesa, la sua corda e l'arco,	17	from the pulling taut of cord and bow

e con men foga l'asta il segno tocca,	18	so that the arrow strikes the target with less force,

    sì scoppia' io sottesso grave carco,	19	thus I collapsed beneath that heavy load

fuori sgorgando lagrime e sospiri,	20	and, with a flood of tears and sighs,

e la voce allentò per lo suo varco.	21	my voice came strangled from my throat.

    Ond' ella a me: "Per entro i mie' disiri,	22	At that she said to me: 'In your desire for me

che ti menavano ad amar lo bene	23	that guided you to love that good

di là dal qual non è a che s'aspiri,	24	beyond which there is nothing left to long for,

    quai fossi attraversati o quai catene	25	'what ditches or what chains did you encounter

trovasti, per che del passare innanzi	26	across your path to make you cast aside

dovessiti così spogliar la spene?	27	all hope of going forward?

    E quali agevolezze o quali avanzi	28	'And what profit or advantage showed

ne la fronte de li altri si mostraro,	29	in the face of other things so that you felt

per che dovessi lor passeggiare anzi?"	30	you must parade yourself before them?'

    Dopo la tratta d'un sospiro amaro,	31	After heaving a bitter sigh

a pena ebbi la voce che rispuose,	32	I hardly had the voice to give the answer

e le labbra a fatica la formaro.	33	my lips were laboring to shape.

    Piangendo dissi: "Le presenti cose	34	In tears, I said: 'Things set in front of me,

col falso lor piacer volser miei passi,	35	with their false delights, turned back my steps

tosto che 'l vostro viso si nascose."	36	the moment that Your countenance was hidden.'

    Ed ella: "Se tacessi o se negassi	37	'Had you stayed silent or denied what you confess,'

ciò che confessi, non fora men nota	38	she said, 'your fault could not be any less apparent

la colpa tua: da tal giudice sassi!	39	since it is known to such a Judge.

    Ma quando scoppia de la propria gota	40	'But when a man's own blushing cheek reveals

l'accusa del peccato, in nostra corte	41	the condemnation of his sin, in our high court

rivolge sé contra 'l taglio la rota.	42	the grindstone dulls the sharp edge of the sword.

    Tuttavia, perché mo vergogna porte	43	'Nonetheless, so that you now may bear

del tuo errore, e perché altra volta,	44	the shame of your straying and, the next time

udendo le serene, sie più forte,	45	that you hear the Sirens' call, be stronger,

    pon giù il seme del piangere e ascolta:	46	'stop sowing tears and listen.

sì udirai come in contraria parte	47	Then you shall hear just how my buried flesh

mover dovieti mia carne sepolta.	48	should have directed you to quite a different place.

    Mai non t'appresentò natura o arte	49	'Never did art or nature set before you beauty

piacer, quanto le belle membra in ch'io	50	as great as in the lovely members that enclosed me,

rinchiusa fui, e che so' 'n terra sparte;	51	now scattered and reduced to dust.

    e se 'l sommo piacer sì ti fallio	52	'And if the highest beauty failed you

per la mia morte, qual cosa mortale	53	in my death, what mortal thing

dovea poi trarre te nel suo disio?	54	should then have drawn you to desire it?

    Ben ti dovevi, per lo primo strale	55	'Indeed, at the very first arrow

de le cose fallaci, levar suso	56	of deceitful things, you should have risen up

di retro a me che non era più tale.	57	and followed me who was no longer of them.

    Non ti dovea gravar le penne in giuso,	58	'You should not have allowed your wings to droop,

ad aspettar più colpo, o pargoletta	59	leaving you to other darts from some young girl

o altra novità con sì breve uso.	60	or other novelty of such brief use.

    Novo augelletto due o tre aspetta;	61	'The fledgling may allow even a third attempt,

ma dinanzi da li occhi d'i pennuti	62	but all in vain is the net flung or arrow shot

rete si spiega indarno o si saetta."	63	in sight of a full-fledged bird.'

    Quali fanciulli, vergognando, muti	64	As children in their shame stand mute, their eyes

con li occhi a terra stannosi, ascoltando	65	upon the ground, listening,

e sé riconoscendo e ripentuti,	66	acknowledging their fault, repentant,

    tal mi stav' io; ed ella disse: "Quando	67	just so I stood. And then she said: 'Now that

per udir se' dolente, alza la barba,	68	you are grieved by what you hear, lift up your beard

e prenderai più doglia riguardando."	69	and you shall have more grief from what you see.'

    Con men di resistenza si dibarba	70	With less resistance is the sturdy oak

robusto cerro, o vero al nostral vento	71	torn from the earth, whether by our northern wind

o vero a quel de la terra di Iarba,	72	or by the one that blows from Iarbas' lands,

    ch'io non levai al suo comando il mento;	73	than was my chin nudged up by her command.

e quando per la barba il viso chiese,	74	When by my beard she sought my face

ben conobbi il velen de l'argomento.	75	I recognized the venom in her words.

    E come la mia faccia si distese,	76	And when I had raised my head

posarsi quelle prime creature	77	my eyes saw that those first-created beings

da loro aspersïon l'occhio comprese;	78	had paused in scattering their flowers

    e le mie luci, ancor poco sicure,	79	and, my vision blurred and still uncertain,

vider Beatrice volta in su la fiera	80	saw Beatrice turning toward the beast

ch'è sola una persona in due nature.	81	that is one person in two natures.

    Sotto 'l suo velo e oltre la rivera	82	Even beneath her veil, even beyond the stream,

vincer pariemi più sé stessa antica,	83	she seemed to surpass her former self in beauty

vincer che l'altre qui, quand' ella c'era.	84	more than she had on earth surpassed all others.

    Di penter sì mi punse ivi l'ortica,	85	The nettle of remorse so stung me then

che di tutte altre cose qual mi torse	86	that whatever else had lured me most to loving

più nel suo amor, più mi si fé nemica.	87	had now become for me most hateful.

    Tanta riconoscenza il cor mi morse,	88	Such knowledge of my fault was gnawing at my heart

ch'io caddi vinto; e quale allora femmi,	89	that I was overcome, and what I then became

salsi colei che la cagion mi porse.	90	she knows who was the reason for my state.

    Poi, quando il cor virtù di fuor rendemmi,	91	Then, when my heart restored my vital signs,

la donna ch'io avea trovata sola	92	I saw the lady I first found alone above me,

sopra me vidi, e dicea: "Tiemmi, tiemmi!"	93	saying: 'Hold on to me and hold me fast!'

    Tratto m'avea nel fiume infin la gola,	94	She drew me into the river up to my throat

e tirandosi me dietro sen giva	95	and, pulling me along behind her, moved

sovresso l'acqua lieve come scola.	96	upon the water as lightly as a skiff.

    Quando fui presso a la beata riva,	97	When I had come close to the blessèd shore

"Asperges me" sì dolcemente udissi,	98	I heard 'Asperges me' so sweetly sung

che nol so rimembrar, non ch'io lo scriva.	99	that I cannot recall nor write it down.

    La bella donna ne le braccia aprissi;	100	The lovely lady spread her arms,

abbracciommi la testa e mi sommerse	101	then clasped my head, and plunged me under,

ove convenne ch'io l'acqua inghiottissi.	102	where I was forced to swallow water.

    Indi mi tolse, e bagnato m'offerse	103	Then she drew me out and led me, bathed,

dentro a la danza de le quattro belle;	104	into the dance of the four lovely ladies

e ciascuna del braccio mi coperse.	105	as each one raised an arm above my head.

    "Noi siam qui ninfe e nel ciel siamo stelle;	106	'Here we are nymphs and in heaven we are stars.

pria che Beatrice discendesse al mondo,	107	Before Beatrice descended to the world

fummo ordinate a lei per sue ancelle.	108	we were ordained to serve her as her handmaids.

    Merrenti a li occhi suoi; ma nel giocondo	109	'We will bring you to her eyes. But to receive

lume ch'è dentro aguzzeranno i tuoi	110	the joyous light they hold, the other three,

le tre di là, che miran più profondo."	111	who look much deeper into things, shall sharpen yours.'

    Così cantando cominciaro; e poi	112	Thus they began their song and then

al petto del grifon seco menarmi,	113	they took me to the griffin's breast,

ove Beatrice stava volta a noi.	114	where Beatrice stood and faced us.

    Disser: "Fa che le viste non risparmi;	115	They said: 'Do not withhold your gaze.

posto t'avem dinanzi a li smeraldi	116	We have placed you here before the emeralds

ond' Amor già ti trasse le sue armi."	117	from which, some time ago, Love shot his darts.'

    Mille disiri più che fiamma caldi	118	A thousand desires hotter than any flame

strinsermi li occhi a li occhi rilucenti,	119	bound my eyes to those shining eyes,

che pur sopra 'l grifone stavan saldi.	120	which still remained fixed on the griffin.

    Come in lo specchio il sol, non altrimenti	121	Even as the sun in a mirror, not otherwise

la doppia fiera dentro vi raggiava,	122	the twofold beast shone forth in them,

or con altri, or con altri reggimenti.	123	now with the one, now with its other nature.

    Pensa, lettor, s'io mi maravigliava,	124	Consider, reader, whether I was struck by wonder

quando vedea la cosa in sé star queta,	125	when I saw the thing itself remain as one

e ne l'idolo suo si trasmutava.	126	but in its image ever changing.

    Mentre che piena di stupore e lieta	127	While my soul, filled with wonder and with joy,

l'anima mia gustava di quel cibo	128	tasted the food that, satisfying in itself,

che, saziando di sé, di sé asseta,	129	yet for itself creates a greater craving,

    sé dimostrando di più alto tribo	130	the other three, who by their bearing

ne li atti, l'altre tre si fero avanti,	131	showed themselves of a higher order, moved forward,

danzando al loro angelico caribo.	132	dancing to their angelic roundelay.

    "Volgi, Beatrice, volgi li occhi santi,"	133	'Turn, Beatrice, turn your holy eyes

era la sua canzone, "al tuo fedele	134	upon your faithful one'--thus ran their song--

che, per vederti, ha mossi passi tanti!	135	'who, to see you, now has come so far.

    Per grazia fa noi grazia che disvele	136	'Of your grace do us a grace: unveil

a lui la bocca tua, sì che discerna	137	your mouth to him so that he may observe

la seconda bellezza che tu cele."	138	the second beauty that you still conceal.'

    O isplendor di viva luce etterna,	139	O splendor of eternal living light--

chi palido si fece sotto l'ombra	140	even he who has grown pale in the shadow of Parnassus

sì di Parnaso, o bevve in sua cisterna,	141	or has drunk deeply from its well,

    che non paresse aver la mente ingombra,	142	would not even he appear to have his mind confounded,

tentando a render te qual tu paresti	143	attempting to describe you as you looked,

là dove armonizzando il ciel t'adombra,	144	Heaven with its harmonies reflected in you,

quando ne l'aere aperto ti solvesti?	145	when in the wide air you unveiled yourself?

Copyright © 1997-1998 The Trustees of Princeton University and Prof. Robert Hollander.
All Rights Reserved. Use of this site is governed by Terms and Conditions of Use/Legal Notices in connection with the use of this web site.
Thank you for visiting. And for reading the fine print. Bugs? Comments?










































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































commedia	minor works	multimedia	lectures	site info	help	search
