
PHILOLOGY Column Image.	COMMENTARY Column Image.	TOYNBEE Column Image.	DARTMOUTH DANTE PROJECT Column Image.	AUDIO Column Image.	IMAGES Column Image.
Move to the Princeton Dante Project home.	Move to the start of Canto 32
Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.
Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 31, Lines 1:200	Move to the Summary Page.	Move to the table of contents.	Move to the Search Page.	Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 33, Lines 1:200

    Tant' eran li occhi miei fissi e attenti	1	My eyes were fixed and so intent

a disbramarsi la decenne sete,	2	to satisfy ten years of thirst

che li altri sensi m'eran tutti spenti.	3	that all my other senses were undone,

    Ed essi quinci e quindi avien parete	4	walled off from anything around them, enclosed

di non caler--così lo santo riso	5	in their indifference, so did the holy smile

a sé traéli con l'antica rete!--;	6	ensnare them in its old, familiar net,

    quando per forza mi fu vòlto il viso	7	when by the power of those goddesses

ver' la sinistra mia da quelle dee,	8	my gaze was forced to travel left

perch' io udi' da loro un "Troppo fiso!"	9	as they cried out: 'Too fixed!'

    e la disposizion ch'a veder èe	10	And then I shared the temporary blindness

ne li occhi pur testé dal sol percossi,	11	of those whose eyes have just been smitten by the sun,

sanza la vista alquanto esser mi fée.	12	leaving me sightless for a time.

    Ma poi ch'al poco il viso riformossi	13	But after my eyes again became accustomed

(e dico "al poco" per rispetto al molto	14	to lesser sights--lesser, I mean, when compared

sensibile onde a forza mi rimossi),	15	to the greater from which they'd been forced to turn--

    vidi 'n sul braccio destro esser rivolto	16	I noted that the glorious army had wheeled around

lo glorïoso essercito, e tornarsi	17	on its right flank and now was facing east,

col sole e con le sette fiamme al volto.	18	with the seven candles and the sun before it.

    Come sotto li scudi per salvarsi	19	As under cover of its shields a squadron

volgesi schiera, e sé gira col segno,	20	turns to save itself, following the colors,

prima che possa tutta in sé mutarsi;	21	before the entire force can rearrange its ranks,

    quella milizia del celeste regno	22	the soldiers of the heavenly kingdom

che procedeva, tutta trapassonne	23	who were marching in the front passed by

pria che piegasse il carro il primo legno.	24	before the chariot turned upon its yoke.

    Indi a le rote si tornar le donne,	25	Then the ladies went back to their wheels

e 'l grifon mosse il benedetto carco	26	and the griffin moved its blessèd load,

sì, che però nulla penna crollonne.	27	but so that not a feather on it shook.

    La bella donna che mi trasse al varco	28	The fair lady who had pulled me through the stream

e Stazio e io seguitavam la rota	29	and Statius and I were following the wheel

che fé l'orbita sua con minore arco.	30	that in a smaller arc had made its turn.

    Sì passeggiando l'alta selva vòta,	31	Then, passing on beneath a vaulting forest,

colpa di quella ch'al serpente crese,	32	emptied through fault of her who trusted in the snake,

temprava i passi un'angelica nota.	33	we measured our steps to an angelic song.

    Forse in tre voli tanto spazio prese	34	We had proceeded perhaps as far as an arrow,

disfrenata saetta, quanto eramo	35	loosed three times from the string, would carry,

rimossi, quando Bëatrice scese.	36	when Beatrice descended from the car.

    Io senti' mormorare a tutti "Adamo";	37	I heard all of them murmuring 'Adam.'

poi cerchiaro una pianta dispogliata	38	Then they circled a tree stripped of its leaves

di foglie e d'altra fronda in ciascun ramo.	39	and any other flowering on its branches.

    La coma sua, che tanto si dilata	40	The higher its branches grew, the wider was their spread.

più quanto più è sù, fora da l'Indi	41	Its height would cause even the Indian,

ne' boschi lor per altezza ammirata.	42	in his towering forest, to gaze in wonder.

    "Beato se', grifon, che non discindi	43	'Blessed are you, griffin, for not plundering

col becco d'esto legno dolce al gusto,	44	with your beak this tree's sweet-tasting fruit

poscia che mal si torce il ventre quindi."	45	that later wrenches bellies with its pain.'

    Così dintorno a l'albero robusto	46	Thus did those around the mighty tree cry out,

gridaron li altri; e l'animal binato:	47	and the double-natured animal replied:

"Sì si conserva il seme d'ogne giusto."	48	'This is how the seed of justice is preserved.'

    E vòlto al temo ch'elli avea tirato,	49	Turning to the shaft that he had pulled,

trasselo al piè de la vedova frasca,	50	he drew it to the foot of the widowed trunk

e quel di lei a lei lasciò legato.	51	and left it bound to the tree from which it came.

    Come le nostre piante, quando casca	52	As our plants, when the great light falls on them,

giù la gran luce mischiata con quella	53	mingled with the light that shines

che raggia dietro a la celeste lasca,	54	in the rays that follow the celestial carp,

    turgide fansi, e poi si rinovella	55	begin to swell their buds and are renewed,

di suo color ciascuna, pria che 'l sole	56	each in its proper color, before the sun

giunga li suoi corsier sotto altra stella;	57	hitches his steeds to other stars,

    men che di rose e più che di vïole	58	so, taking on a hue less red than roses

colore aprendo, s'innovò la pianta,	59	yet deeper than violets, the tree renewed itself

che prima avea le ramora sì sole.	60	where its branches just before had been so bare.

    Io non lo 'ntesi, né qui non si canta	61	The hymn that company then chanted

l'inno che quella gente allor cantaro,	62	is not sung on earth nor could I make it out,

né la nota soffersi tutta quanta.	63	nor bear to hear that music to its end.

    S'io potessi ritrar come assonnaro	64	Could I describe how those pitiless eyes,

li occhi spietati udendo di Siringa,	65	hearing of Syrinx, were lulled to sleep,

li occhi a cui pur vegghiar costò sì caro;	66	the eyes whose lengthy vigil cost so dear,

    come pintor che con essempro pinga,	67	I would fashion, as a painter does

disegnerei com' io m'addormentai;	68	when painting from a model, how I fell asleep.

ma qual vuol sia che l'assonnar ben finga.	69	But let him, who can do it, portray his nodding off.

    Però trascorro a quando mi svegliai,	70	I move along, therefore, to when I came awake

e dico ch'un splendor mi squarciò 'l velo	71	and say a brightness broke my veil of sleep,

del sonno, e un chiamar: "Surgi: che fai?"	72	as did the call: 'Arise, what are you doing?'

    Quali a veder de' fioretti del melo	73	As, when brought to see the blossoms on the apple-tree

che del suo pome li angeli fa ghiotti	74	that makes the angels hungry for its fruit

e perpetüe nozze fa nel cielo,	75	and celebrates perpetual marriage-feasts in Heaven,

    Pietro e Giovanni e Iacopo condotti	76	Peter and John and James were overcome,

e vinti, ritornaro a la parola	77	called back into themselves at the word

da la qual furon maggior sonni rotti,	78	by which still deeper sleep was broken,

    e videro scemata loro scuola	79	and saw their company diminished

così di Moïsè come d'Elia,	80	both by Moses and Elijah

e al maestro suo cangiata stola;	81	and their teacher's raiment changed,

    tal torna' io, e vidi quella pia	82	such did I become. I saw, standing above me,

sovra me starsi che conducitrice	83	the same compassionate lady

fu de' miei passi lungo 'l fiume pria.	84	who had guided my steps along the river.

    E tutto in dubbio dissi: "Ov' è Beatrice?"	85	All in doubt I asked: 'Where is Beatrice?'

Ond' ella: "Vedi lei sotto la fronda	86	And she: 'Look there beneath the new-sprung blossoms

nova sedere in su la sua radice.	87	of the tree where she is seated on the root.

    Vedi la compagnia che la circonda:	88	'See the company encircling her.

li altri dopo 'l grifon sen vanno suso	89	The others all ascend behind the griffin

con più dolce canzone e più profonda."	90	with a song more sweet and more profound.'

    E se più fu lo suo parlar diffuso,	91	I do not know if she had more to say,

non so, però che già ne li occhi m'era	92	for now, before my eyes, appeared the one

quella ch'ad altro intender m'avea chiuso.	93	who had closed me off from any other thought.

    Sola sedeasi in su la terra vera,	94	On the bare ground she sat alone,

come guardia lasciata lì del plaustro	95	as if left behind to guard the chariot

che legar vidi a la biforme fera.	96	I had seen the twofold beast make fast.

    In cerchio le facevan di sé claustro	97	The seven nymphs encircled her as a cloister,

le sette ninfe, con quei lumi in mano	98	holding up lights that would not waver

che son sicuri d'Aquilone e d'Austro.	99	should winds blow even from the north or south.

    "Qui sarai tu poco tempo silvano;	100	'Here for a time you shall be a woodsman

e sarai meco sanza fine cive	101	and then forever a citizen with me

di quella Roma onde Cristo è romano.	102	of that Rome where Christ Himself is Roman.

    Però, in pro del mondo che mal vive,	103	'Therefore, to serve the world that lives so ill,

al carro tieni or li occhi, e quel che vedi,	104	keep your eyes upon the chariot and write down

ritornato di là, fa che tu scrive."	105	what now you see here once you have gone back.'

    Così Beatrice; e io, che tutto ai piedi	106	Thus Beatrice. And I, overwhelmed,

d'i suoi comandamenti era divoto,	107	prostrate at the feet of her commands,

la mente e li occhi ov' ella volle diedi.	108	gave my mind and eyes to what she wished.

    Non scese mai con sì veloce moto	109	Never did fire descend with such swift motion

foco di spessa nube, quando piove	110	out of thickened banks of clouds,

da quel confine che più va remoto,	111	plunging from the farthest zone of air,

    com' io vidi calar l'uccel di Giove	112	as I saw the bird of Jove swoop down and plummet

per l'alber giù, rompendo de la scorza,	113	through the tree, ripping the bark,

non che d'i fiori e de le foglie nove;	114	shredding flowers and fresh leaves.

    e ferì 'l carro di tutta sua forza;	115	It struck the chariot with its full force

ond' el piegò come nave in fortuna,	116	so that it reeled like a ship tossed in a tempest,

vinta da l'onda, or da poggia, or da orza.	117	now leeward, now windward, driven by the waves.

    Poscia vidi avventarsi ne la cuna	118	Then I saw, flinging itself into the very cradle

del trïunfal veiculo una volpe	119	of the triumphal car, a fox so wasted

che d'ogne pasto buon parea digiuna;	120	it seemed deprived of any nourishment.

    ma, riprendendo lei di laide colpe,	121	But my lady, railing at its foul offenses,

la donna mia la volse in tanta futa	122	drove it back in such retreat

quanto sofferser l'ossa sanza polpe.	123	as its fleshless bones allowed.

    Poscia per indi ond' era pria venuta,	124	Then, from where it had swept down before,

l'aguglia vidi scender giù ne l'arca	125	I saw the eagle plummet to the chariot's floor

del carro e lasciar lei di sé pennuta;	126	and leave it feathered with its plumage.

    e qual esce di cuor che si rammarca,	127	Such a voice as issues from a grieving heart

tal voce uscì del cielo e cotal disse:	128	I heard break forth from Heaven, saying:

"O navicella mia, com' mal se' carca!"	129	'O my little bark, how badly are you laden!'

    Poi parve a me che la terra s'aprisse	130	Then it seemed to me the earth was cleft

tr'ambo le ruote, e vidi uscirne un drago	131	between the wheels, and I saw a dragon issue,

che per lo carro sù la coda fisse;	132	thrust its tail up through the car,

    e come vespa che ritragge l'ago,	133	and as a wasp withdraws its sting, so it drew back

a sé traendo la coda maligna,	134	its venomed tail, ripping out part of the floor,

trasse del fondo, e gissen vago vago.	135	and then slithered off on its own errant way.

    Quel che rimase, come da gramigna	136	What was left was once more covered,

vivace terra, da la piuma, offerta	137	as is fertile soil with weeds, by plumage,

forse con intenzion sana e benigna,	138	offered perhaps with kind and innocent intent,

    si ricoperse, e funne ricoperta	139	and both the wheels and shaft

e l'una e l'altra rota e 'l temo, in tanto	140	were completely covered over

che più tiene un sospir la bocca aperta.	141	in less time than a sigh may part the lips.

    Trasformato così 'l dificio santo	142	Thus transformed, the holy edifice

mise fuor teste per le parti sue,	143	put forth heads on all its parts,

tre sovra 'l temo e una in ciascun canto.	144	three on the shaft and one at every corner--

    Le prime eran cornute come bue,	145	the first three bore horns like oxen, the others

ma le quattro un sol corno avean per fronte:	146	had a single horn upon their foreheads--

simile mostro visto ancor non fue.	147	such a monster as never seen before.

    Sicura, quasi rocca in alto monte,	148	Secure, like a fortress on a towering mountain,

seder sovresso una puttana sciolta	149	I saw a disheveled harlot sitting there,

m'apparve con le ciglia intorno pronte;	150	casting provocative glances this way and that.

    e come perché non li fosse tolta,	151	I saw a giant who stood beside her,

vidi di costa a lei dritto un gigante;	152	perhaps to prevent her being taken from him.

e basciavansi insieme alcuna volta.	153	They kissed each other again and again.

    Ma perché l'occhio cupido e vagante	154	But because she turned on me

a me rivolse, quel feroce drudo	155	her lustful, roving eye, that savage lover

la flagellò dal capo infin le piante;	156	thrashed her body from head to foot.

    poi, di sospetto pieno e d'ira crudo,	157	Then, full of suspicion and cruel in his rage,

disciolse il mostro, e trassel per la selva,	158	he unhitched the monster and dragged it through the wood

tanto che sol di lei mi fece scudo	159	so far that the wood itself now screened

a la puttana e a la nova belva.	160	the harlot and the strange brute from my sight.

Copyright © 1997-1998 The Trustees of Princeton University and Prof. Robert Hollander.
All Rights Reserved. Use of this site is governed by Terms and Conditions of Use/Legal Notices in connection with the use of this web site.
Thank you for visiting. And for reading the fine print. Bugs? Comments?




















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































commedia	minor works	multimedia	lectures	site info	help	search
