
PHILOLOGY Column Image.	COMMENTARY Column Image.	TOYNBEE Column Image.	DARTMOUTH DANTE PROJECT Column Image.	AUDIO Column Image.	IMAGES Column Image.
Move to the Princeton Dante Project home.	Move to the start of Canto 29
Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.	Search for items in categories.
Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 28, Lines 1:200	Move to the Summary Page.	Move to the table of contents.	Move to the Search Page.	Move to the following Location: Purg, Canto 30, Lines 1:200

    Cantando come donna innamorata,	1	After she had finished speaking

continüò col fin di sue parole:	2	like a lady touched by love she sang:

"Beati quorum tecta sunt peccata!"	3	'Beati quorum tecta sunt peccata!'

    E come ninfe che si givan sole	4	And like the nymphs that wandered all alone

per le salvatiche ombre, disïando	5	through shaded forests, one seeking to find,

qual di veder, qual di fuggir lo sole,	6	another to escape, the sun,

    allor si mosse contra 'l fiume, andando	7	she moved against the current's flow,

su per la riva; e io pari di lei,	8	walking along the bank, while I on my side

picciol passo con picciol seguitando.	9	tried to match her shorter steps with mine.

    Non eran cento tra ' suoi passi e ' miei,	10	We had not taken a hundred steps between us

quando le ripe igualmente dier volta,	11	when the two banks curved as one around a bend

per modo ch'a levante mi rendei.	12	so that once more I was headed toward the east.

    Né ancor fu così nostra via molta,	13	And we had not gone far in that direction

quando la donna tutta a me si torse,	14	when the lady turned and faced me,

dicendo: "Frate mio, guarda e ascolta."	15	saying: 'My brother, look and listen.'

    Ed ecco un lustro sùbito trascorse	16	Suddenly a shining brightness

da tutte parti per la gran foresta,	17	flared through all the forest

tal che di balenar mi mise in forse.	18	so that I thought it must be lightning.

    Ma perché 'l balenar, come vien, resta,	19	But since lightning is gone even as it flashes

e quel, durando, più e più splendeva,	20	and that light, shining on, became more lustrous,

nel mio pensier dicea: "Che cosa è questa?"	21	I asked myself: 'Now what is this?'

    E una melodia dolce correva	22	Through the luminous air there came a melody

per l'aere luminoso; onde buon zelo	23	so sweet that I was mastered by a worthy zeal

mi fé riprender l'ardimento d'Eva,	24	to reprimand the impudence of Eve:

    che là dove ubidia la terra e 'l cielo,	25	there when earth and heaven were still obedient,

femmina, sola e pur testé formata,	26	how she, a woman, alone and just then given shape,

non sofferse di star sotto alcun velo;	27	could not resist, not stay beneath the veil.

    sotto 'l qual se divota fosse stata,	28	Had she remained submissive there beneath it,

avrei quelle ineffabili delizie	29	I should have tasted these ineffable delights

sentite prima e più lunga fïata.	30	much sooner and a longer time.

    Mentr' io m'andava tra tante primizie	31	While I walked on among so many first fruits,

de l'etterno piacer tutto sospeso,	32	this foretaste of eternal beauty, enchanted

e disïoso ancora a più letizie,	33	though desiring joys still greater.

    dinanzi a noi, tal quale un foco acceso,	34	beneath the green boughs the air before us

ci si fé l'aere sotto i verdi rami;	35	seemed to become a blazing fire

e 'l dolce suon per canti era già inteso.	36	and that sweet sound could now be heard as song.

    O sacrosante Vergini, se fami,	37	O sacred Virgins, if fasting, cold, or sleepless nights

freddi o vigilie mai per voi soffersi,	38	I've ever suffered for your sake,

cagion mi sprona ch'io mercé vi chiami.	39	necessity drives me to call for my reward.

    Or convien che Elicona per me versi,	40	Now let the springs of Helicon pour forth

e Uranìe m'aiuti col suo coro	41	and let Urania help me with her choir

forti cose a pensar mettere in versi.	42	to put in verse things hard for thought.

    Poco più oltre, sette alberi d'oro	43	A short way on, seven golden trees

falsava nel parere il lungo tratto	44	seemed to appear, an illusion caused

del mezzo ch'era ancor tra noi e loro;	45	by the space that separated them from us.

    ma quand' i' fui sì presso di lor fatto,	46	But when I had come close enough,

che l'obietto comun, che 'l senso inganna,	47	distance no longer could deceive the senses

non perdea per distanza alcun suo atto,	48	nor distort the common object's proper shape,

    la virtù ch'a ragion discorso ammanna,	49	and the faculty that readies reason for its matter

sì com' elli eran candelabri apprese,	50	knew them as candelabra, which indeed they were,

e ne le voci del cantare "Osanna."	51	and in the voices of the chant I heard 'Hosanna.'

    Di sopra fiammeggiava il bello arnese	52	From above flared the glorious array,

più chiaro assai che luna per sereno	53	far brighter than the moon, bright

di mezza notte nel suo mezzo mese.	54	at mid-month in a midnight sky.

    Io mi rivolsi d'ammirazion pieno	55	Full of wonder, I turned to my good Virgil

al buon Virgilio, ed esso mi rispuose	56	and he answered with a look

con vista carca di stupor non meno.	57	no less charged with amazement.

    Indi rendei l'aspetto a l'alte cose	58	Then I raised my face again to the high mysteries.

che si movieno incontr' a noi sì tardi,	59	They moved so slowly toward us

che foran vinte da novelle spose.	60	even newly wedded brides would have outpaced them.

    La donna mi sgridò: "Perché pur ardi	61	The lady scolded: 'Why is your desire so set

sì ne l'affetto de le vive luci,	62	on the display of living lights

e ciò che vien di retro a lor non guardi?"	63	that you have failed to note what comes behind them?'

    Genti vid' io allor, come a lor duci,	64	Then I saw people, clad in white, who followed,

venire appresso, vestite di bianco;	65	as though led by the lights, their garments

e tal candor di qua già mai non fuci.	66	of a whiteness never seen on earth.

    L'acqua imprendëa dal sinistro fianco,	67	The water to my left was all aglow

e rendea me la mia sinistra costa,	68	and like a shimmering glass gave back

s'io riguardava in lei, come specchio anco.	69	an image of my left side if I turned to look.

    Quand' io da la mia riva ebbi tal posta,	70	When I was at a point on my edge of the bank,

che solo il fiume mi facea distante,	71	where only the river flowed between us.

per veder meglio ai passi diedi sosta,	72	I paused to have a better view

    e vidi le fiammelle andar davante,	73	and saw the flames advance,

lasciando dietro a sé l'aere dipinto,	74	leaving behind them painted air

e di tratti pennelli avean sembiante;	75	as though they had been brushes in a painter's hand,

    sì che lì sopra rimanea distinto	76	so that above us blazed in streaks

di sette liste, tutte in quei colori	77	the seven bands in all the hues the sun

onde fa l'arco il Sole e Delia il cinto.	78	takes for his bow and Delia for her girdle.

    Questi ostendali in dietro eran maggiori	79	These banners stretched beyond my sight.

che la mia vista; e, quanto a mio avviso,	80	As near as I could judge,

diece passi distavan quei di fori.	81	the outermost were set ten paces from each other.

    Sotto così bel ciel com' io diviso,	82	Beneath so fair a sky as I describe

ventiquattro seniori, a due a due,	83	twenty-four elders, two by two,

coronati venien di fiordaliso.	84	came crowned with lilies.

    Tutti cantavan: "Benedicta tue	85	All were singing: 'Blessèd are you

ne le figlie d'Adamo, e benedette	86	among the daughters of Adam

sieno in etterno le bellezze tue!"	87	and blessèd is your loveliness forever!'

    Poscia che i fiori e l'altre fresche erbette	88	When the flowers and the verdant grasses

a rimpetto di me da l'altra sponda	89	across the river on the other bank

libere fuor da quelle genti elette,	90	were left bare of those chosen people,

    sì come luce luce in ciel seconda,	91	as, in the heavens, light comes after light,

vennero appresso lor quattro animali,	92	four living creatures followed them,

coronati ciascun di verde fronda.	93	each crowned with green-leaved wreaths,

    Ognuno era pennuto di sei ali;	94	and every one had six wings as his plumage,

le penne piene d'occhi; e li occhi d'Argo,	95	wings so full of eyes that the eyes of Argus,

se fosser vivi, sarebber cotali.	96	were they to come alive, would be just like them.

    A descriver lor forme più non spargo	97	To describe their forms, reader, I do not spend

rime, lettor; ch'altra spesa mi strigne,	98	more rhymes, for other outlay so constrains me

tanto ch'a questa non posso esser largo;	99	I cannot deal more lavishly in this.

    ma leggi Ezechïel, che li dipigne	100	Go read Ezechiel who depicts them as he saw them,

come li vide da la fredda parte	101	descending from the frigid zone

venir con vento e con nube e con igne;	102	in wind and cloud and fire.

    e quali i troverai ne le sue carte,	103	And just as you shall find them on his pages,

tali eran quivi, salvo ch'a le penne	104	such were they there--but for the wings,

Giovanni è meco e da lui si diparte.	105	where John accords with me and not with him.

    Lo spazio dentro a lor quattro contenne	106	These four marked off a space that held

un carro, in su due rote, trïunfale,	107	a two-wheeled chariot of triumph,

ch'al collo d'un grifon tirato venne.	108	drawn along behind a griffin's neck.

    Esso tendeva in sù l'una e l'altra ale	109	The griffin lifted both its wings between

tra la mezzana e le tre e tre liste,	110	the middle band of light and the two sets of three

sì ch'a nulla, fendendo, facea male.	111	so that it did not cut through any band,

    Tanto salivan che non eran viste;	112	wings raised so high that they were lost to sight.

le membra d'oro avea quant' era uccello,	113	Its parts were golden where it was a bird,

e bianche l'altre, di vermiglio miste.	114	and all the rest of it was white, with some vermilion.

    Non che Roma di carro così bello	115	Never did Rome give joy to Africanus,

rallegrasse Affricano, o vero Augusto,	116	nor indeed Augustus, with such a splendid car.

ma quel del Sol saria pover con ello;	117	Compared to it, the sun's would seem but poor--

    quel del Sol che, svïando, fu combusto	118	the chariot of the sun, which, gone astray,

per l'orazion de la Terra devota,	119	at the pious prayer of Earth

quando fu Giove arcanamente giusto.	120	was quite consumed in Jove's mysterious justice.

    Tre donne in giro da la destra rota	121	Then came three ladies dancing in a round

venian danzando; l'una tanto rossa	122	near the right wheel, one so flaming red

ch'a pena fora dentro al foco nota;	123	she hardly would be noticed in a fire.

    l'altr' era come se le carni e l'ossa	124	Another seemed as though her flesh and bones

fossero state di smeraldo fatte;	125	were made of emerald, while the third

la terza parea neve testé mossa;	126	seemed white as is new-fallen snow.

    e or parëan da la bianca tratte,	127	Sometimes it seemed the white, and now the red,

or da la rossa; e dal canto di questa	128	led in the dance. And from the red one's song

l'altre toglien l'andare e tarde e ratte.	129	the others took their movements, quick or slow.

    Da la sinistra quattro facean festa,	130	Four other ladies, dressed in purple,

in porpore vestite, dietro al modo	131	were dancing at the left, keeping to the cadence

d'una di lor ch'avea tre occhi in testa.	132	the three-eyed one among them set.

    Appresso tutto il pertrattato nodo	133	Behind the group I have described

vidi due vecchi in abito dispari,	134	I made out two old men, unlike in their attire

ma pari in atto e onesto e sodo.	135	but alike in bearing, honorable and grave.

    L'un si mostrava alcun de' famigliari	136	One showed himself conjoined with those

di quel sommo Ipocràte che natura	137	who follow great Hippocrates,

a li animali fé ch'ell' ha più cari;	138	whom nature shaped for creatures she loves most,

    mostrava l'altro la contraria cura	139	while the other showed a different disposition,

con una spada lucida e aguta,	140	his sword so bright and sharp

tal che di qua dal rio mi fé paura.	141	that even from across the stream it made me fear.

    Poi vidi quattro in umile paruta;	142	Then I saw four, humble in their aspect,

e di retro da tutti un vecchio solo	143	and, after them, an old man came alone and walked

venir, dormendo, con la faccia arguta.	144	as though he slept, despite his keen expression.

    E questi sette col primaio stuolo	145	All seven of these were dressed just like the group

erano abitüati, ma di gigli	146	that first appeared, except they lacked

dintorno al capo non facëan brolo,	147	garlands of lilies around their heads--

    anzi di rose e d'altri fior vermigli;	148	theirs were of roses and other crimson flowers.

giurato avria poco lontano aspetto	149	From just a little farther off one would have sworn

che tutti ardesser di sopra da' cigli.	150	that they were all on fire above the eyebrows.

    E quando il carro a me fu a rimpetto,	151	And when the chariot stood across the stream from me

un tuon s'udì, e quelle genti degne	152	a thunder-clap was heard and all that worthy throng,

parvero aver l'andar più interdetto,	153	as though forbidden to go farther, stopped

fermandosi ivi con le prime insegne.	154	behind the banners that had come before them.

Copyright © 1997-1998 The Trustees of Princeton University and Prof. Robert Hollander.
All Rights Reserved. Use of this site is governed by Terms and Conditions of Use/Legal Notices in connection with the use of this web site.
Thank you for visiting. And for reading the fine print. Bugs? Comments?























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































commedia	minor works	multimedia	lectures	site info	help	search
